2025-910A
Comprehensive Plan 20 35
2025-910A
Table of Contents
ImagineGNV Chapter Corresponding State Statute Element
Gainesville Today Not required by State Statute
Our City Government Intergovernmental Coordination Element
Our Cultural Identity Not required by State StatuteHistoric Preservation
Element
Where We Live Housing Element
How We Build Future Land Use Element
Capital Improvements Element
Property Rights Element
How We Get Around Transportation ElementMultimodal Transportation
Mobility Element
Our Environment Sanitary Sewer, Solid Waste, Drainage, Potable
Water, and Natural Groundwater Aquifer
Recharge Element
Conservation Element
Our Health and Wellbeing Recreation and Open Space Element
How We Work Not required by State Statute
How We Learn Not required by State StatutePublic Schools
Facilities Element
How to Use this Plan
ImagineGNV will improve nine aspects of life in Gainesville, each organized into its own chapter
of the plan. The following chapters are listed below in the Table of Contents, which may
correspond to a required State Statute “Element” for Comprehensive Plans. Each chapter begins
with a description of life in Gainesville today, including existing challenges and recent progress
the City has made to address disparities and improve the quality of life for all people in
Gainesville. It then identifies a set of Goals, Objectives, and Policies that are the building blocks
for future policymaking and changes in Gainesville.
Goals:
Objectives:
Policies:
Potential Indicators: not intended to be final; likely to be changed over the planning horizon
2
2025-910A
Introduction
Executive Summary
The City of Gainesville has been a center for business, education, government, and more for
over a century, but not all residents have benefited from Gainesville’s growth in the same way.
ImagineGNV is a strategy to start creating a future Gainesville where all people can live up to
their full potential, regardless of their background. This strategy builds on strengths across our
communities today to overcome disparities and guide growth over the next 10 year.s
The City’s Comprehensive Plan (or Comp Plan) is a legally binding document that guides
decisions and investments affecting nearly every aspect of life in Gainesville.
The State of Florida requires that cities local governments update their plans every 7 years. The
plan must include goals, objectives, and policies on issues ranging from how land can be used to
how funds are spent on roads, buses, sewers, and parks. Those goals, objectives, and policies
have the power to require certain actions by government, private developers, businesses, and
others.
What is ImagineGNV?
The City will use ImagineGNV to guide major decisions about how the City should grow and how
funds should be invested.
ImagineGNV – the City’s latest plan update – meets State guidelines but also adds new goals,
objectives, and policies that aim to confront longstanding disparities to make Gainesville a
place where everyone can thrive. ImagineGNV lays out priorities and actions the City will take
over the next decade to invest in transformational projects and reinvest in communities that are
historically left out of the planning process, including low-income and underrepresented
communities. This plan uplifts policies that will expand access to affordable homes, quality
education, well-paying jobs, and thriving neighborhoods.
Three pillars guided the development of ImagineGNV:
1. Center Low-Income and Underrepresented Residents in Gainesville. By focusing
specifically on the urgent needs and concerns of low-income and underrepresented
neighbors, the City’s priorities and decision-making processes can address needs that have
been unmet for generations to build the foundations for as tronger economy and
community.
2. Involve the Whole City Organization. By working with staff and experts that focus on
different aspects of city life, the plan can ensure that strategies and city staff will work
better together to improve quality of life for all Gainesville residents.
3
2025-910A
3. Generate Accountability and Action. By including specifics on how the plan will be
implemented and naming responsible parties this strategy will set a new foundation for
collaboration, action, and transparency.
The plan’s powers include:
Rules and Protections:
ImagineGNV establishes rules that the City and private actors must follow to support and
protect the community. For example, whenever a developer wants to construct housing they
must seek approvals from the City. City staff will look to ImagineGNV to determine whether the
developer’s plans support the City’s long-term goals.
Spending and Investment:
ImagineGNV sets goals to prioritize City spending on staff, facilities, projects, programs, and
resources. When allocating budgets for new facilities and facility repairs, City departments will
look to Imagine GNV to determine what and where to prioritizes pending.
Public Participation:
ImagineGNV defines how the City should engage and collaborate with communities, businesses,
and government partners. For example, whenever the City creates a plan or makes a decision
regarding a new policy or development, City staff will look to ImagineGNV to shape how the City
should work with residents to make decisions.
Who Shaped this Plan?
Hundreds of Gainesville residents and stakeholders provided input that shaped this plan,
participating in one of the city’s most robust engagement efforts to date. Between January and
September 2021, City departments partnered closely with communities historically left out of
the planning process to gather input on the existing Comp Plan and community priorities for the
future of growth and investment in Gainesville. Due to the ongoing nature of the COVI-D19
pandemic, most activities were conducted virtually, though some were hosted locally by
neighbors and community groups. ImagineGNV outreach included:
Conversations -In-A-Box:
The City invited community members to host their own Conversation-in-a-Box meeting with
their neighbors to gather ideas on how to create a better future for the city. Conversations-in-a-
Box is designed for use by neighbors, advocates, and local organizations to gather at a
convenient time and place to discuss ideas and share it directly with city staff. With this new
engagement tool, five meetings were hosted by neighborhood associations,r esidents, and local
businesses.
Public Comment:
The City gave the pen toinvited all community members, inviting feedback early in the process
and on multiple drafts of the plan before it was finalized. Feedback was collected through an
online platform called Konveio, which provided an opportunity for members of the public to
view and comment on draft language.
4
2025-910A
Listening Sessions:
The City hosted three virtual gatherings to discuss ImagineGNV. Nearly 165 community members
attended the listening sessions to learn more about ImagineGNV and participate in the visioning
session. Each session had a brief presentation to describe the Plan’s power as a tool for
Gainesville and then split into breakout groups to co-create a vision for a stronger, more unified
community. Breakout groups were facilitated by city staff who lead and implement this work on
a day-to-day basis. For many of these staff members, it was the first time they facilitated a
conversation with residents, and this experience provided the city staff with the training and
tools needed to host a new type of meaningful, interactive dialogue in the future .
Survey:
Collected data and feedback from community members on what a moree quitable Gainesville
will look like. Of the respondents, we city staff heard that housing, jobs & the economy, and
health & educationjobs, the economy, health, and education are the most pressing racial equity
concerns in the community.
Paid Fellowships:
As an integral component of the ImagineGNV planning process, the City of Gainesville recruited
a cohort of ten Gainesville residents and students – representative of historically and presently
marginalized groups – for a 5-month paid fellowship, running from February to June 2021. The
Imagine Fellows learned about the City’s current Comprehensive Plan and policymaking
process, worked in collaboration with City staff to shape ImagineGNV, and supported
engagement with the Gainesville community to gather input that influenced this plan.
The ImagineGNV Fellowship was created to ensure that neighbors were able to talk to neighbors
about ImagineGNV, to receive authentic feedback, and to generate potential pathways forward.
Ten fellows were selected to learn about the comprehensive plan update and develop plans to
engage their communities. The fellows created surveys, met with family, friends, fellow co-
workers, students and colleagues between April and June of 2021. The following insights were
gleaned from those conversations.
Three main issues uncovered by the ImagineGNV Fellows :
1. Lack of community understanding about what the city does and doesn’t do: Who
does what? What are the processes? How do projects get funded?
2. Lack of trust that anything will change: 3 main things that haven’t changed over time:
• Access to housing,
• Access to decent-paying jobs and relevant job training,
• Displacement in historically underrepresented or low-income neighborhoods
3. Lack of visible and positive change: Communities give feedback but then nothing
happens orOR what does happen isn’t what they wanted to happen .
What Did We Hear?
Main priorities for Fellows and the communities they spoke with :
5
2025-910A
1. Senior/youth opportunities: increasing gun violence is a result of a need for more
access to employment opportunities, cultural opportunities, and intergenerational
community-building. Seniors of color want to play a role in remedying this situation as
community elders but lack a method of doing so. Comments include:
• “More structured activities for young children would be good. I havet wo2 children 7
and& 5 years old. After school there is nothing for them to do in East Gainesville.”
• “We most certainly do need more educational programs for the children here. After
school they still need to be stimulated. I’m in the NW section of town, around 5th
Avenue.”
• “My grandkids play at home because they don’t have anywhere to go.”
• “I’m in the SW and there is no place for my kids. They are stuck in the apartment
after school. I will be getting a car really soon so I will be able to take my kids to
other places to play.”
• “There is no place for the elderly Black people to go to and socialize with other
people their own age.” “There is nothing here for seniors since the senior center was
moved across town.”
• “I hope there will be something for the elderly to do at the new( Kelly) Ccenter on 8th
avenue (Kelly Center).”
• “We have a new playground in my neighborhood, but there is nowhere near here for
my daughter to go for educational programming outside of school.”
2. Limited transportation: Community members must often cross town to work and play .
3. Housing access: Housing access is a challenge – becoming a homeowner is still a dream
for many residents but it’s increasingly out of the realm of possibility for many if not
most longstanding renters. Home prices have increased dramatically and even those
who have been saving for homes are currently unable to afford anything within their
price range in the city. Rental costs are steadily rising as well.
4. Food access: Food access is a challenge both in NE Gainesville but also in SW
Gainesville. These residents work in various part of the city, make use of the city’s
transportation options, pay GRU bills, and feel they shouldn’t be forgotten in the city’s
development and planning processes.
5. Community self-determination: Community needs support to improve itself (rather
than having improvements come from outside in: “We don’t want people to come here to
save us. We have our own ideas.”
6. UF student jobs and housing: Students want to remain here to do work that has
meaning and impact for business and for social change. Job opportunities and living
opportunities are limited for former students. Many UF students expressed a desire to
live in housing that’s more integrated into the Gainesville community: “I don’t want to
displace anyone by moving into their neighborhood, but I feel like I am living completely
separately from people who aren’t students. There are student apartments and areas
and then there’s the rest of Gainesville. I rarely interact with anyone who isn’t a student
or professor. This isn’t by choice. It’s by design. Could things be designed differently?”
6
2025-910A
7. Budgeting and development decision -making: “I had no idea money from GRU went to
pay for things happening in the city. How do you decide which departments get money? ”
8. Desire to better understand how the city works and what’s happening here: “Why
doesn’t the city just put more restaurants and stores in East Gainesville?” “How can we
get more investment in our neighborhood without having to leave our neighborhood?” “I
know we have a center over here, but I’m not aware of what programming theyh ave for
seniors.” “I don’t know how to find out when there is programming and entertainment
offered by the city. I don’t use a computer much.”
Who Shaped This Plan?
During the listening sessions, we discussed:
What would an equitable Gainesville look or feel like to you?
• “Acknowledging the past inter-generational trauma, people who have been
and are currently discriminated against, and exclusionary practices that have
happened. And keep that in mind while we think of a more equitable future, newcomers
to Gainesville need to be able to be aware of and find how to get connected to
communities.”
• “An equitable Gainesville in terms of health, for me, looks like having equal access to
all things health related. From medical, healthy food options and alternative health
methods that are not overpriced.”
What are the most pressing racial equity concerns in your community that you’d like the
Comprehensive Plan to focus on?
• “Home ownership to build generational wealth. Meaningful resident engagement. Create
active community engagement, where the City doesn’t only request feedback when there
are problems; engagement should be ongoing. Community members should have a voice
in what is being developed and happening in their communities. Rental stock is high and
consumers are not able to save for a down payment to purchase a home. Lack of
affordable housing supply and gentrification and displacement. The housing voucher
waiting is too long. Exclusionary zoning.”
Input from the above engagement activities directly shaped this plan. City staff compiled all
feedback received and coded comments to the associated chapter theme. Each piece of input
was considered in the drafting process to ensure that what we heard andc ommunity priorities
were reflected in this new plan. Please refer to the Appendix for summaries of what we heard .
By bringing neighbors into the decision-making process and defining priorities together,
ImagineGNV captured real-world experiences and concerns that shaped the City’s priorities and
approach to housing, development, education, the economy, the arts, and more.
7
2025-910A
Acknowledgements
The City of Gainesville expresses thanks and gratitude to all authors and contributors to
ImagineGNV.
City Commission
Lauren Poe Mayor (2016-2022)
Harvey Ward Mayor (2022-Present)
Reina Saco Commissioner At Large (2020-2025)
Gail Johnson Commissioner At Large (2018-2021)
Gigi Simmons Commissioner District 1 (2018-2021)
David Arreola Commissioner District 3 (2017-2022)
Adrian Hayes-Santos Commissioner District 4 (2016-2022)
Desmon Duncan-Walker Commissioner District 1 (2022-Present)
Cynthia Moore Chestnut Commissioner At Large (2022-Present)
Ed Book Commissioner District 2 (2023-Present)
Bryan Eastman Commissioner District 4 (2023-Present)
Casey Willits Commissioner District 3 (2023-Present)
James Ingle Commissioner At Large (2025-Present)
City of Gainesville Executive Leadership Team
Cynthia Curry City Manager (2021-2025)
Andrew Persons City Manager (2025-Present)
Brian Singleton Chief Operating Officer (2025-Present)
City of Gainesville Core Team
Nathaniel Chan Department of Sustainable Development
Forrest Eddleton Department of Sustainable Development
Brittany McMullen Department of Sustainable Development
Chapter 1. Gainesville Today
Adam Carr Department of Sustainable Development (Former)
Andrew Persons City Manager (2025-Present)Department of Sustainable
Development
Chapter 2. Our City Government
Alison Pager Department of Sustainable Development
Andrew Persons City Manager (2025-Present)Department of Sustainable
Development
Chapter 3. Our Cultural Identity
Kathleen Kauffman Department of Sustainable Development
8
2025-910A
Leslie Ladendorf Parks, Recreation, and Cultural Affairs
Russell Etling Parks, Recreation, and Cultural Affairs (Former)
Jason Simmons Department of Sustainable Development
Chapter 4. Where We Live
Brittany McMullen Department of Sustainable Development
Phimetto Lewis Housing and Community Development
Corey Harris Housing and Community Development
Lawrence Calderon Department of Sustainable Development (Former)
John Wachtel Housing and Community Development
Ari Rabinovich Department of Sustainable Development
Chapter 5. How We Build
Juan Castillo Department of Sustainable Development (Former)
Nathaniel Chan Department of Sustainable Development
Brittany McMullen Department of Sustainable Development
Phil Mann City Manager’s Office
Dennis Nguyen Department of Financial Services
Chapter 6. How We Get Around
Deborah Leistner Department of Transportation
Scott Wright Department of Transportation
Seth Wood Department of Transportation
Juan Castillo Department of Sustainable Development (Former)
Chapter 7. Our Environment
Lilliana Kolluri Department of Sustainable Development (Former)
Jennie Ford Department of Sustainable Development
Chelsea Proia Department of Sustainable Development
Forrest Eddleton Department of Sustainable Development
Dan Zhu Office of Resiliency
Gail Mowry Public Works
Matthew Burke Public Works
Rick Hutton Gainesville Regional Utilities
Shane Williams Public Works
Mateusz Buszko Public Works (Former)
Austin Smith Public Works
Chapter 8. Our Health and Wellbeing
Brandy Stone Gainesville Fire Rescue
Logan Marcum University of Florida
Alison Pager Department of Sustainable Development
9
2025-910A
Chief Stephen Hesson Gainesville Fire Rescue (Former)
Chapter 9. How We Work
Erik Bredfeldt Department of Sustainable Development (Former)
Ari Rabinovich Department of Sustainable Development
Chapter 10. How We Learn
Bedez Massey Department of Sustainable Development
Nathaniel Chan Department of Sustainable Development
Data & Analysis
Reginald Hayes Department of Sustainable Development (Former)
Nathaniel Chan Department of Sustainable Development
Bridgett Smart Department of Sustainable Development (Former)
Juan Duque-Villa Department of Sustainable Development
Special Thanks
Laura Rawson Department of Communications and Marketing
Dustin Walsh Department of Communications and Marketing
Imagine Fellows ImagineGNV Fellowship
Hillary Laskey Department of Sustainable Development (Former)
Eri Furusawa HR&A Advisors
Lydia Gaby HR&A Advisors
Hannah Glosser HR&A Advisors
Ben Howort Office of Equity and Inclusion
Zeriah Folston Office of Equity and Inclusion
Porshe Chiles Office of Equity and Inclusion
Chief Roberto Sutton Gainesville Fire Rescue
Jason Sanchez City Plan Board
Nick Hill City Plan Board
Robert Ackerman City Plan Board
Stephanie Sutton City Plan Board
Joshua Ney City Plan Board
Jamie Bell City Plan Board
Bobby Mermer City Plan Board
10
2025-910A
11
Gainesville Today
2025-910A
Gainesville Today
How We Got Here
Gainesville residents today celebrate a beautiful natural environment and strong community
values – though both the environment and its peoples have changed dramatically over time. The
city’s recorded history begins as an agricultural society of the Potano Native American peoples.
Over the past century, government, private, and household investment created what is now a
central economic hub in North Central Florida. After the conclusion of the Civil War, soldiers
enrolled at the University of Florida and contributed to the expansion of new neighborhoods,
many of which have since been annexed into city boundaries to ensure these residents
contribute taxes to the public systems upon which their lifestyles rely. The University of Florida’s
relocation to its current home in Gainesville has drawn hundreds of thousands of people to the
region over the last century.
Economic and social policies in Gainesville have led to reduced investment in some
neighborhoods and some residents have greater access to services than others. These residents
often live in neighborhoods that have not received sufficient investment in housing or
neighborhood amenities. In recent years, much of the housing development has catered to
university students in the form of student housing near the periphery of the UF campus. In turn,
this has increased land values and rents, and leading to criticisms of displacement in
communities near downtown. Single family home development has trended toward the
peripheral edges of Gainesville and continues to fuel a pattern of sprawl-based development.
Where We Are
Gainesville today thrives because of the culture of its neighborhoods and the
creativity and innovation from people and perspectives from all over the world
joining together at the University , the City, and the local business community.
As we plan for Gainesville’s future, we recognize some important strengths and challenges:
Strengths:
Gainesville enjoys a rich cultural history and natural environment. The city is home to many
historic neighborhoods and communities, numerous Universityof Florida (UF) civic and cultural
facilities, and many different parks that are used not only for recreation butalso for cultural
events. Over the city’s history, a variety of significant civic buildings and cultural centers have
been developed which celebrate local artists, history, and culture – including the Cotton Club
Museum, A. Quinn Jones Museum, Hippodrome Theater, Bo Diddley Plaza, and the Thomas
Center. Natural areas and springs in and around Gainesville are enjoyed by residents, and social
12
2025-910A
and environmental activism that characterized the post-1960s era of Gainesville are still
significant pieces of local culture and community today.
Gainesville is a growing community and economy. Gainesville is a diverse community of
approximately 132,000 people growing at a steady pace. Though the speed of population
growth is less than for Alachua County and the State of Florida overall, the growing population
has led to increased land development and infrastructure expansion. Gainesville’s growth and
change over the years can largely be attributed to UF. As the state’s flagship university, UF is the
economic driver of our community and attracts people from around the world to study, work,
and live in Gainesville. As UF has grown, so has the local economy. The city today operates as a
site for a growing number of jobs, businesses, and innovation in biotechnology, agricultural
sciences, technology, software, advanced manufacturing, logistics, and more.
Gainesville’s youth and diversity has led to continued investment in quality of life. Gainesville’s
population is more diverse than that of the surrounding County and the State, with a larger
share of African Americans, Asians, and people of two or more races compared to the County
and the State. This diversity has contributed to a community rich in arts and culture that makes
Gainesville an interesting and engaging place to live. With a large number of students and
transient residents, Gainesville has a significant population of younger adults and young
professionals, especially compared to surrounding areas in North Central Florida. In the past
10-15 years, many of these younger adults would have only stayed in the Gainesville area while
completing their education and then move away for jobs and other opportunities. Today
however, the City and the University have increasingly made efforts to keep recent graduates in
the area. This has led to investing in business development, improving civic spaces, and
maintaining high-quality natural areas for people to enjoy.
Pockets of naturally affordable housing exists in some areas across the city. Though median
housing values have been increasing, much of east Gainesville, and certain parts of southwest
Gainesville, have lower home prices and rents compared with most of west Gainesville. This
housing – where the housing is of adequate quality– provides an affordable option to lower-
income individuals or families to remain in Gainesville.
Challenges:
Quality of life in Gainesville includes stark disparities by various socioeconomic factors like
income and place of residence. Though Gainesville is an attractive community to live in, across
nearly every measure of wellbeing, low-income residents fare worse than their affluent
neighbors, and that has been the case for decades. In particular, low-income households in
Alachua County face greater challenges in daily life. Data shows that low-income residents on
average have smaller, older, and lower value homes compared to other neighbors, which can
drastically raise energy and utility costs. With less access to available jobs and in
neighborhoods served by the lower-performing public schools in the region, low-income
residents participate less in the job market. These types of disparities highlight that our Black
neighbors, and marginalized adults and children from other backgrounds, experience severe
cost burden and are under-resourced compared to their urgent needs.
13
2025-910A
Demand for housing is driving up rents and spurring development, prompting fears of
displacement within historic communities of color. As demand for student and young
professional housing has increased, private and public investment has shifted to Gainesville’s
traditional core, contributing to increases in rent. With proximity to UF’s campus, Santa Fe
College’s downtown campus, and various employment and entertainment options in downtown,
these areas are increasingly being seen as prime candidates for new development catering to
wealthier households. Substandard housing has been demolished rather than renovated or
redeveloped, and sit empty contributing to market speculation, and many parcels today are
owned by individuals or businesses not located within Gainesville or the region. With
comparatively fewer undeveloped parcels compared to outlying areas, properties that have
existing buildings, both residential and non-residential are being purchased and redeveloped.
Neighbors have expressed fear that these trends will continue to alter the character of historic
communities of color and lead to existing households and businesses being priced out or bought
out by non-resident investors over time.
Gainesville faces increasing risk of flood and heat crises. Although Gainesville doesn’t face
climate risks as extreme as other communities in Florida, hurricanes and floods of increasing
intensity, stronger storms, and hotter summers pose challenges to our community. Lower-
income communities with lower-quality housing are more likely to face flooding and drainage
issues due to aging and inadequate infrastructure. Lower-income homes typically have building
envelopes that let in more outside air, and lower-efficiency appliances. This can lead to greater
electricity and/or water consumption, higher utility bills, and greater heat danger as residents
forego electric cooling during dangerously warm months.
14
2025-910A
15
Our City Government
2025-910A
Our City Government
Intergovernmental Coordination Section
Where We Are and How We Got Here
The primary purpose of lLocal gGovernment is to work to improve communities and positively
impact the lives of neighbors through laws, policy, and public investment. Imagine GNV, the
City’s Comprehensive Plan update, is an undertaking that requires coordination efforts among
various entities to ensure efficient and deliberate action to result in short term and long-term
solutions for the community. The type of collaboration necessary for this to work must be
pursued at all levels, including City to County, City to State, and City to community-based
organizations. The Our City Government cChapter serves to lay out practices and strategies to
ensure this coordination is occurring at all levels of governance and is progressing towards
building and expanding on current partnerships while seeking out opportunities for other efforts
and possibilities.
Public engagement is essential to a functioning and impactful local government. With this
responsibility in mind, the City aims to thoughtfully and significantly aid in breaking down
barriers to participation and decision-making. This includes combatting limited access to
government resources, exclusion from City processes and community partnerships, and uneven
distribution of community resources. The City is committed to finding ways to address these
issues head on by closing gaps in housing, transportation, child welfare, health care access and
outcomes, cultural and recreational amenities, education, economic development and local
resiliency. This is all accomplished through a well-organized, and goal-oriented working
structure between jurisdictions, government agencies, non-governmental organizations. This
Chapter aims to provide structure, communication, and evaluation to the overall framework for
the City to facilitate achieving these goals.
This chapter’s identifies goals, objectives, and policies that will be implemented in whole or in
part by the City of Gainesville and its partners to:
• Establish best practices and expectations for intergovernmental, interagency, and
community-based partnerships.
• Advance and encourage participation at the community level while concurrently working
to align internal plans and communication.
• Encourage coordination efforts in City projects, priorities, and endeavors.
• Support initiatives for advancing, evaluating, and collaborating on Level of Service (LOS)
Standards.
16
2025-910A
Progress to Build On:
The City of Gainesville has taken important and incremental steps towards creating an
organization focused on promoting intergovernmental coordination and fostering meaningful
community-based partnerships. These areas include establishing, maintaining, and improving
relationships with other nearby jurisdictions and governing bodies, several State level
departments, interdepartmentally within the City, and with community organizations and
initiatives. These partnerships are widespread throughout the City through active projects and
collaborations with multiple other agencies, some examples include: affordable housing
initiatives with Federal, State, Local and NGO partnerships, recreational facilities shared with
the County and School Board, environmental project initiatives with private community groups,
industry connections through building and construction partnerships, and much more. The
table below highlights the partnerships specifically called out in this chapter; though many
more exist throughout the City’s organization than can be collected in one list, it shows the
depth of partnerships that the City can build upon for current and future collaboration.
Organization Type Location
Policies: 2.1.1 - 2.1.5, 2.1.8,
2.1.10, 2.2.1 - 2.2.6, 2.3.1 -
Alachua County County Government
2.3.6, 2.3.8, and 2.4.1
Objective: 2.3
Alachua County Environmental
County Department Policy: 2.2.6
Protection Department
Alachua County Housing
Agency Policy: 2.5.3
Authority (ACHA)
City of Alachua Local Municipality Policiesy: 2.1.3 and 2.1.5
Federal Emergency Management
Federal Government Policy: 2.1.2
Agency (FEMA)
Florida Department of Children
State Government Policy: 2.1.9
and Families (DCF)
Florida Department of
State Government Policiesy: 2.1.9, 2.2.2 and 2.2.6
Environmental Protection (FDEP)
Florida Department of
State Government Policiesy: 2.1.3, 2.1.9, and 2.5.1
Transportation (FDOT)
Gainesville City Commission
City of Gainesville Policy: 1.1.3
(CCOM)
Gainesville Housing Authority
Agency Policy: 2.5.3
(GHA)
Metropolitan Transportation
Regional Organization Policiesy: 2.3.3 and 2.5.1
Planning Organization (MTPO)
17
2025-910A
Organization Type Location
North Central Florida Regional
Regional Organization Policiesy: 2.3.3 and 2.5.4
Planning Council (NCFRPC)
NW 5th Ave Neighborhood Neighborhood Policy: 2.4.3
Pleasant Street Historic District Neighborhood Policy: 2.4.3
Public Works – Alachua County County Government Policy: 2.1.2
Public Works – City of
City of Gainesville Policy: 2.1.2
Gainesville
Regional Airport Authority Board Regional Organization Policy: 2.5.2
Regional Transit System (RTS) Transportation Policy: 2.5.1
Policiesy: 2.1.9, 2.2.2, 2.4.1,
Santa Fe College (SF) Educational Organization
2.4.3 and 2.4.4
School Board of Alachua County Policiesy: 2.1.5, 2.1.6, 2.1.7,
Educational Organization
(SBAC) 2.1.8, and 2.1.9
State of Florida State Government Introduction, Goal 1 and Goal 2
U.S. Census Bureau (Census) Federal Government Policy: 1.2.1
United States Environmental
Federal Government Policiesy: 2.2.2 and 2.2.6
Protection Agency (EPA)
United States of America
Federal Government Introduction, Goal 1 and Goal 2
(U.S.A.)
Policiesy: 2.1.9, 2.2.2, 2.4.1 and
University of Florida (UF) Educational Organization
2.4.2
Water Management Districts
Regional Organization Policiesy: 2.1.9, 2.2.2 and 2.2.6
(WMDs)
West University Avenue Corridor Neighborhood Policy: 2.4.3
The following list highlights the general partnerships that were mentioned throughout the
chapter, but no specific named entities other than those on the table above :
• Community partnerships (Policy: 1.3.2)
• Local faith organizations (Policy 1.1.6)
• Advocacy groups (Policy 1.1.6)
• Neighborhoods/Communities (Objective: 1.3)
• Historically disinvested communities (Policy 1.1.4)
• Private organizations (Objective: 2.5)
• Interdepartmental (Policiesy: 1.2.1, 1.2.2,. Objective: 1.4)
• Non-profit organizations (Objective: 2.5)
• Other government entities (Objective: 2.1, 2.2 )
• Regional, state, and federal agencies (Policy: 2.4.1)
• Trade and vocational institutions (Policy: 2.4.5)
18
2025-910A
• Local educational institutions (Objective: 2.4)
• Stakeholder groups (Policy: 1.2.3)
• Collaborative working groups (Policy: 1.2.3)
• Other municipalities/local jurisdictions (Policiesy: 2.1.3, 2.1.10, 2.2.2, 2.4.1, .Objective
2.2)
Concurrently, the City aims to improve upon citizen engagement and public participation efforts
to promote City resources for all. These efforts are driven through the Comprehensive Plan,
Strategic Plan, annual Budget, as well as city procedures and policies governing human
resources, purchasing, and community engagement. All of these play a critical role in the basic
functions of the City.
What’s At Stake?
The creation of a functional, responsive, and transparent City Government benefits both the City
as an organization and the people we serve. This action is essential to promote collaboration,
connectivity, and transparency throughout our organization, and can be achieved through
clearly defining ongoing and planned partnerships in the City. Coordinating City planning and
policymaking with that of the surrounding authorities at the city, county, regional, state, and
federal level, along with special authority boards and community organizations, helps to ensure
consistency in the services provided for, and participated in, by all. Additionally, the City
strives to work towards encouraging citizen engagement and participation in its operations and
community efforts. The City recognizes that a proactive instead of reactive mindset is key to
helping our community feel empowered to participate and share their voice which ultimately
results in more representation for all areas of the City and achieves better results. The work
described in this chapter and the rest of the Comprehensive Plan is essential to the success of
the City, the well-being of its residents, and the related success of the City’s partnerships and
shared goals with community partners.
19
2025-910A
Intergovernmental Coordination Section
Goal 1: All people in Gainesville will benefit from an efficient,
transparent, collaborative, and accountable city government.
A functioning local government requires clear communication, leadership, and organization at
its core. With the City of Gainesville’s internal governmental structure having unique features
and its own complexity, it is important to clearly set out best practices, expectations, and goals
for the overall operations and functioning of our city government. Thei nner intradepartmental
structure and functioning within the City Governmentcity government is key to ensuring all goals
city-wide are met. A clear and efficient structure can be achieved through promoting effective
communication across all channels, implementing key leadership and initiative driven
strategies, and working on mechanisms to provide transparent communication and effective
resources both internally and to the community. An efficiently operating and effectively leading
force are two qualities that are key for our City city government to pursue in order to provide
the best outcomes for our community and create a more accessible and welcomingC ity city
landscape.
20
2025-910A
Potential Indicators (How we measure progress):
- Percentage of annual budget allocated to community / participatory projects.
- Attendance records of cCity outreach initiatives.
- Analysis of public feedback from surveys from community workshops and events,
including important data about community member’s feelings of trust in the City and
levels of transparency and clarity.
- Percent of qualitative engagement goals achieved by City staff for each project.
- Evidence of interdepartmental coordination among City departments, staff, committees,
and leadership.
- Individual departments collecting feedback about resources they create and provide to
the public, to better inform future decisions.
- Evaluation of internal employee surveys regarding transparency, clarity, and
collaboration efforts
Objective 1.1 – Build community capacity and understanding of cCity
governmental functions, powers, and processes to prepare neighbors to
meaningfully advocate for their interests and participate in the development
of strategies and decision -making sessions.
Policy 1.1.1 Use a variety of communication strategies such as infographics and storytelling,
to ensure cCity decision-making processes, outreach, and strategy development
efforts are easy to understand, transparent, and communicated with clear
intervals/milestones.
Policy 1.1.2 Build upon and/or revitalize programs that help serve as civic education
programs and can encompass many areas of need and interest that are
emphasized by the community.
Policy 1.1.3 Explore new approaches to make public comment forums and city commission
meetings more accessible for all people in Gainesville.
Policy 1.1.4 All relevant departments, as activated by the City Manager or designee, will
engage in non-project related community outreach including in communities with
demonstrated needs and identifiable service gaps. Through this ongoing
engagement, city staff will invest in relationships with residents to build trust,
community capacity for advocacy, and democratic participation.
Policy 1.1.5 Expand and formalize relationships with partner organizations including local
faith organizations and advocacy groups to build involvement in the development
and implementation of city initiatives and plans. In addition, the cCity will
identify opportunities to partner with these organizations to advance
implementation of priority strategies.
21
2025-910A
Objective 1.2 – All City departments will work together when setting priorities
and making decisions that have impacts to the Comprehensive Plan, Strategic
Plan, and the City’s vision to promote an integrated framework of internal and
external collaboration.
Policy 1.2.1 Promote collaboration of several departments within the City structure to
research, analyze, and develop methods for obtaining and/or creating data
disaggregated by relevant factors. Collaborative methods should be pursued and
available, verified, and reputable outside data should be considered, such as the
U.S. Census, to help develop a database of this information to assist with City
functions, policy, and decision-making.
Policy 1.2.2 Encourage inner-intradepartmental efforts to utilize existing tools and resources
to conduct project and community surveys to utilize in analysis and
implementation methods.
Policy 1.2.3 Expand on efforts and opportunities to encourage community engagement at all
levels. When available and applicable, utilize collaborative working groups that
encourage participation from all stakeholder groups to help garner key feedback
and provide more opportunities for public comment and engagement. Utilize
these opportunities to inform and initiate City projects and improvements.
Objective 1.3 - Designate neighborhoods to serve as areas to guide
implementation of the Comprehensive Plan and development community
projects. In each area, the City will convene community organizations,
neighbors, and interdepartmental staff quarterly as appropriate to discuss
local issues that relate to topics covered in this plan and seek collaborative
feedback on implementation strategies.
Policy 1.3.1 Utilize existing departmental resources to be committed towards community
driven initiatives and neighborhood projects.
Policy 1.3.2 Enable interdepartmental staff as needed to support the development of
community projects. Work towards building community partnerships and
interagency collaboration to reach community goals.
Policy 1.3.3 Encourage collaboration of City staff and leadership to the community projects
and allow for different personnel to be flexible in their ability to assist with the
programming.
22
2025-910A
Objective 1.4 – Support interdepartmental communication and coordination
within the cCity organization. Encourage collaboration at all levels to foster
open communication channels, joint efforts on projects and initiatives, and
promote effective and informative communication for the public.
Policy 1.4.1 Promote effective communication strategies internally among departments.
Implement feedback and check-in opportunities to encourage active problem-
solving and proactive interactions. Evaluate various methods during and after
implementation to continue to build upon communication strategies and
progress.
Policy 1.4.2 Establish and continue to monitor and improve upon existing methods for project
tracking across departments. Proper tracking and timely updates will help
ensure efficient project flow is achieved and will result in more projects reaching
completion to benefit the community.
Policy 1.4.3 Provide clear and effective avenues for achieving dispute and conflict resolution
among internal departments and encourage open communication and record
keeping to resolve issues as they happen and evolve.
23
2025-910A
Goal 2: All people in Gainesville will benefit from a cCity
structure that works towards maintaining, building upon, and
establishing intergovernmental and community -based
partnerships
Interagency coordination is a key part of running an effective and collaborative cCity
government. This goal will be achieved by keeping the cCity vision, priorities, and citizens at the
forefront of near-term decision-making and long-term planning. Coordination efforts should be
incorporated into partnership decisions, composition of internal boards and teams,
communication efforts among the different groups, and through establishment of new beneficial
partnerships. By following uniform practices for coordination efforts, undertaking open
communication among these entities and the public, achieving public trust, and opening
cultivating channels of partnership with civil organizations and governmental entities will lead
to a more collaborative Gainesville City for all.
24
2025-910A
Indicators (How we measure progress):
- Number of community and intergovernmental partnerships where the City has active
representation.
- Composition of City boards, charters, and committees by background and community
connections.
- Monitor efforts to invite community groups and other governmental partners to ongoing
and new initiatives.
- Encouraging public meeting feedback in all partnerships, tracking the effectiveness of
implementing ways to provide feedback and the occurrences.
- Tracking of outcomes from interagency efforts, including local and widespread impacts.
Objective 2.1 – Support and maintain collaborative and informative processes
and procedures for coordination of Level of Service Standards by encouraging
and enhancing interagency and intergovernmental efforts.
Policy 2.1.1 Coordinate Level of Service standards with Alachua County for any public
facilities or services where cross-jurisdictional responsibility exists, including
services the City provides within unincorporated Alachua County and services
Alachua County provides within the City. Ensure that both jurisdictions share
relevant information with each other and with partner agencies as needed to
support the goals, objectives, and policies of the City, County, and applicable
regional comprehensive plans.Coordinate Level of Service (LOS) standards with
Alachua County for those services requiring LOS standards that are provided by
the City within unincorporated Alachua County and for those services provided
by Alachua County within the City and share information with other agencies and
individuals as needed to promote the goals, objectives, and policies of the City,
County and Regional comprehensive plans.
Policy 2.1.2 Coordinate with Alachua County and other governmental entities to ensure that
the capacity and function of shared watersheds are maintained and that
stormwater quantity LOS standards are designed to maintain floodplain
elevations at or below the 10-year flood channel and 100- year floodplain as
established in the current Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and kept on file in the Public Works
Departments of the City of Gainesville and Alachua County.
Policy 2.1.3 Coordinate with Alachua County, FDOT, and other municipalities to adopt
concurrency management mechanisms to maintain adopted LOS standards by:
a. Reviewing all County and City of Alachua Land Use Amendments that may
impact adopted LOS standards within the City of Gainesville;
b. Requesting that Alachua County reviews and comments on City of
Gainesville Land Use Amendments that may impact adopted LOS
standards within the County; and
25
2025-910A
c. Requesting that the City of Alachua reviews and comments on City of
Gainesville Land Use Amendments that may impact adopted LOS
standards within the City of Alachua.
Policy 2.1.4 Coordinate with Alachua County on additional funding sources for transportation
capital and operating needs and shall obtain its share of such funds either
through interlocal agreement or statutory formula.
Policy 2.1.5 Support and mMaintain interlocal or other formal agreements that describe joint
processes for collaborative planning and decision-making with the School Board
of Alachua County (SBAC) and other units of local government that provide
services but do not have regulatory authority over the use of land, and with
Alachua County and the City of Alachua. The joint processes will include
coordination on siting of facilities with countywide significance, including locally
unwanted land uses regarding population projections and criteria for the
selection of school sites in accordance with the outcomes and strategies of this
plan. Per Subsection 1013.33(1), F.S., the planning effort must also consider the
feasibility of keeping central facilities viable in order to encourage central city
redevelopment and efficient use of infrastructure and to discourage urban
sprawl.
Policy 2.1.6 Review all development proposals by the SBAC according to the provisions of the
City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances and Comprehensive Plan, subject to the
provisions and exclusions of Chapter 1013, F.S.
Policy 2.1.7 In accordance with the provisions of Section 163.31777, F.S., the City will
coordinate with the SBAC to continue the implementation of the interlocal
agreement and to implement the How We LearnC chapter of the Comprehensive
Plan to extend concurrency requirements to public schools.
Policy 2.1.8 Meet with representatives of the SBAC and other Alachua County local
governments to discuss public school concurrency issues.
Policy 2.1.9 Provide notice of proposed land use amendments and development proposals to
governmental agencies providing services that may be affected as appropriate,
including the SBAC, UF, Santa Fe College, applicable Water Management District
(WMDs), the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT), Florida Department of
Environmental Protection (FDEP), and Florida Department of Children and
Families, and provide an opportunity for the concerns of these agencies to be
addressed in the review process.
Policy 2.1.10 Provide notice of proposed land use amendments and development proposals to
Alachua County and impacted municipalities within the County and provide an
opportunity for the concerns of these local governments to be addressed in the
review process.
26
2025-910A
Objective 2.2 – Support and maintain collaborative planning and management
of natural resources and protection of the environment, including those that
fall under the jurisdiction of multiple entities.
Policy 2.2.1 Maintain interlocal agreements with Alachua County to coordinate the planning,
acquisition and management of recreation and open space lands and facilities
within the Urban Reserve Area (URA).
Policy 2.2.2 Collaborate with Alachua County, the several municipalities, the Florida
Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP), the Water Management
Districts, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Santa Fe
College, and UF to protect groundwater and other environmental resources
throughout Alachua County.
Policy 2.2.3 Collaborate with Alachua County to protect wetlands and significant habitat, and
to conserve and acquire significant habitat in the Urban Reserve Area.
Policy 2.2.4 Collaborate with Alachua County regarding criteria for the location of hazardous
materials collection/transfer treatment facilities. One criterion shall be
consideration of potential groundwater contamination.
Policy 2.2.5 Cooperate with Alachua County and other waste material handlers in the
establishment of periodic special waste collection programs for household
hazardous waste such as tires, used oil, batteries, and asbestos.
Policy 2.2.6 Engage with Alachua County to identify areas of pollution to surface water and
groundwater and to document present conditions and cleanup status. Assist in
identifying the parties responsible for the polluted areas and require such parties
to mitigate pollution problems. Cooperate with the Alachua County
Environmental Protection Department, the FDEP, the Water Management
Districts, and the EPA and support the appropriate agencies with efforts to
accomplish the following:
a. Identify areas of pollution to surface waters and groundwater;
b. Implement monitoring programs that provide reports describing present
environmental conditions and clean-up status;
c. Identify parties responsible for polluted areas, and require such parties to
mitigate pollution problems;
d. Discourage the creation of new brownfield and other environmental
contamination sites by implementing existing regulations and improving
them as needed; and
e. Encourage environmentally sound development and redevelopment of
existing brownfield and other environmental contamination sites.
27
2025-910A
Objective 2.3 – Support and maintain a collaborative and communicative
relationship with Alachua County to work towards common goals and
intergovernmental coordination efforts.
Policy 2.3.1 As part of a tourism development program, cooperate with Alachua County in the
County's preparation of a tourism plan and in studies by the County of the
economic impacts of cultural, heritage, and eco-tourism on Gainesville and
Alachua County.
Policy 2.3.2 Collaborate with Alachua County to promote cooperative planning within the
Urban Reserve Area through the Boundary Adjustment Act .
Policy 2.3.3 Evaluate, through joint planning processes with Alachua County, the impacts of
their respective comprehensive plans on “areas of concern” identified in the
North Central Florida Regional Policy Plan. The City will participate in the
Metropolitan Transportation Planning Organization (MTPO) to provide
coordinated transportation planning for the Urbanized Area
Policy 2.3.4 Initiate annexation(s) of areas within its designated Urban Reserve Area that
meet the criteria of “urban in character” as outlined in the Alachua County
Boundary Adjustment Act, and that are projected to be urban in character within
the horizon of the Comprehensive Plan.
Policy 2.3.5 Proceed with annexation according to the criteria of the Alachua County
Boundary Adjustment Act. Urban areas within its Urban Reserve Area that meet
the criteria of “urban in character” as outlined in the Boundary Adjustment Act
are subject to annexation by the City.
Policy 2.3.6 Collaborate with Alachua County to develop the required urban services report
that will address the fiscal issues related to urban services for residents in the
Urban Reserve Area, including minimizing the time that one jurisdiction is
providing services to an area for which it is not receiving revenue.
Policy 2.3.7 Amend, upon the annexation of any land, the Comprehensive Plan to reflect data
and analysis changes, establish land uses on newly annexed areas, and provide
services to meet adopted LOS standards.
Policy 2.3.8 Implement, in the interim period between annexation and the amendment of the
Comprehensive Plan to include the newly annexed areas, Alachua County's
adopted Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Regulations.
Objective 2.4 – Support and maintain a collaborative and communicative
relationship with local educational institutions.
Policy 2.4.1 Coordinate with Alachua County, other municipalities in Alachua County,
University of Florida, Santa Fe College, regional, state and federal agencies, and
28
2025-910A
with other entities regarding updating and implementing the Local Mitigation
Strategy.
Policy 2.4.2. Coordinate with the University of Florida in efforts to stabilize and strengthen
neighborhoods in the University Context Area
Policy 2.4.3 Coordinate with Santa Fe College on the implementation of the College's master
plan for its downtown campus so that the implementation of the master plan is
sensitive to impacts on the Pleasant Street Historic District, the NW Fifth Avenue
neighborhood, and the West University Avenue corridor.
Policy 2.4.4 Review and assess Santa Fe College development proposals in accordance with
applicable provisions of the City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances and
Comprehensive Plan, subject to applicable provisions of the Florida Statutes.
Policy 2.4.5 Coordinate with trade and vocational institutions to support training and
continued education opportunities, along with evaluating any proposed
developments or additions to these efforts within the City.
Objective 2.5 – Support and maintain collaborative and communicative
partnerships with other miscellaneous agencies, boards, and organizations.
Policy 2.5.1 Coordinate with the MTPO and FDOT in planning services for the transportation
disadvantaged within the Regional Transit System service area. Coordination with
the MTPO and FDOT shall be achieved through the City’s participation in the
Technical Advisory Committee of the MTPO .
Policy 2.5.2 Coordinate with the Gainesville/Alachua County Regional Airport Authority to
ensure that non-compatible land uses within the 55, 65 and 70 DNL airport noise
contours are eliminated by requesting the Authority's review of proposed Land
Use Plan Amendments and Development Plans within the noise contour areas .
Policy 2.5.3 Provide information and assistance to the Gainesville Housing Authority, the
Alachua County Housing Authority and other agencies providing housing
assistance for low-income, very-low income, and extremely low-income
peoplehouseholds.
Policy 2.5.4 Utilize the NCFRPC to mediate those issues that cannot be resolved through
established coordinating mechanisms, in accordance with Section 186.509, F.S.
29
2025-910A
30
Our Cultural Identity
2025-910A
Our Cultural Identity
Historic Preservation Section
Where we are and how we got here
Gainesville’s history as its own town really began when the new Florida Railroad linking
Fernandina to Cedar Key bypassed Newnansville, the county seat at that time, prompting
Alachua County residents to vote for a new county seat on the railroad line. From the beginning,
most of Gainesville’s residents were planters, and slave labor was utilized for the farming
industry and construction. Shortly before the Civil War, Gainesville counted 269 residents in
1860; a number that would reach 2,000 over the next twenty years. After the Civil War,
Gainesville became one of the largest cotton shipping stations in the state. Prior to the 1860’s,
Alachua County did not have a state-supported public school system. The county built the first
school in the city-limits in Gainesville in 1865. This school catered to white students in the
community. Subsequently, the first black school, the Union Academy, opened its doors shortly
after in 1867. It once stood on the grounds where the city’s Rosa B. Williams/352Arts Center now
resides.
After the Civil War, local freed enslaved people moved into the City and thus made up the
majority of residents. Additionally, Freedmen, many from South Carolina, settled their families
primarily in the Brush Addition (Pleasant Street area) and Olivia A. Porter’s subdivision. The
neighborhoods they inhabited still remain important historic and architectural resources, and
the concentration of folk housing within them represents the social, economic, and cultural
traditions of Gainesville’s black community.
When the University of Florida began operating the Gainesville campus in 1906, this helped
jumpstart the exponential growth for the city. Now among the nation’s top five ranked public
universities, the University of Florida brings a plethora of cultures and viewpoints to Gainesville
through their students and faculty, each with their own vision of how to express their history,
culture, and art in their new hometown. The constant influx of new residents and the diversity
of cultures they bring backdropped with an “Old Florida” town is an essential and defining
characteristic of Gainesville.
Our Cultural Experience Today
One of the best ways to assess the cultural identity of a community is through their commitment
to the arts, culture, and the preservation of its history. They tell us where we have been and
help us envision where we are going. A community that does not know its past cannot properly
build upon that past in a manner that is beneficial and culturally defining for its residents.
31
2025-910A
An individual or family’s income and where they live can disproportionately affect how they
experience the City’s arts and cultural programs. Affordability of programs and services,
transportation opportunities and other factors create barriers that are often difficult to
overcome. Low-income residents are less likely to attend City organized cultural events. In
addition, arts and cultural programs and services have not reflected the demographic makeup
of the City nor addressed the varying needs of different communities.
In previous decades, the discussions and decisions about historic preservation, what should be
saved, what should be preserved, did not include representation from the City’s historically
black neighborhoods. As a result, these neighborhoods, especially near areas with strong
development pressures, have had limited protection afforded to them via preservation
threatening to erase the traditional character residents remember. For example, Pleasant
Street, one of five Historic Districts in the city, and the oldest predominantly black residential
area in Gainesville, has seen an increased level of new construction with new residents moving
in, rising concerns about increased housing costs and displacement, and the loss of the cultural
identity of the community. The neighboring 5th Avenue area, which is not a historic district but
has several historic buildings and was surveyed for possible historic designation, is also facing
increasing development pressure while not benefitting from the protections being a desginated
district can provide. This has resulted in many historic properties being lost to severe
deterioration and demolition.
Multiple factors make the City’s existing arts and cultural programming inaccessible to some of
Gainesville’s residents. City grant programs have historically funded arts organizations that
appeal to a limited range of residents and experiences. This has been partially due to extensive
application processes that discourage low-resource organizations from seeking this funding.
There is great opportunity for the City to repair and increase relationships with low-resource
organizations by providing grant application workshops and assistance, initiating new grant
opportunities specifically for smaller art and cultural organizations, and collecting feedback
from neighbors to make sure that programming is reflective of their culture and identity. Lastly,
City cultural programming has tended to be “Downtown centric” and could be better
distributed throughout the City.
Progress to build on
The Park, Recreation and Cultural Affairs Department and the Department of Sustainable
Development’s Office of Historic Preservation have mades everal recent advancements in
preserving Black history and creating arts and cultural venues that serve the City’s diverse
communities. The renovation, preservation, and ongoing management of the home of legendary
educator and civil rights leader A. Quinn Jones in the 5th Avenue/Pleasant Street neighborhood
provides a platform for featuring Black scholars and artists and showcasing empowering
exhibits and programs about local Black history, the African Diaspora, and current societal
issues. Since 2021, the City had its inaugural Historic Preservation Awards, honoring those
citizens who work tirelessly to promote and protect treasured historic places and spaces. The
32
2025-910A
City will continue this annual recognition as one way to highlight the importance and value of
Gainesville’s historic neighborhoods and cultural preservation efforts.
In recent years, the City’s Parks, Recreation, and Cultural Affairs (PRCA) Department has
expanded its efforts to recruit a greater diversity of artists, reach out to underserved audiences,
and develop vehicles to forge collaborative relationships that will reach deeper into the
community. By revamping systems and processes the City can provide a higher level of
transparency, build trust, and improve access. Similarly, historic preservation efforts in
Gainesville have shifted how historic significance is defined, which has encouraged preservation
efforts to be more people-centric and inclusive. In April 2021, the Old Mount Carmel Baptist
Church was placed on the National Register of Historic Places based on areas of significance
that included the social history of the church as a strategic planning center for the Civil Rights
Movement and its association with the Reverend Thomas A. Wright, a leader of the local NAACP
and a civil rights leader in Florida. This historic and cultural significance is in addition to any
architectural significance which is traditionally associated with the preservation of historic
buildings. Other preservation programs are planned that focus on those non-tangible
experiences that are passed down through the generations; oral histories, music, and historic
neighborhood events and gatherings are also greatly important to how history and heritage are
kept alive in our communities.
What’s at stake?
A fundamental element of a culturally and historically vibrant City is that people from all
backgrounds can see themselves and their culture as an intrinsic part of their city and feel that
their identity and culture are respected and celebrated. Arts, culture, and preservation play a
big role in achieving this essential sense of belonging. This chapter aims to recognize past
shortcomings, identify a vision of what the City could be, and build a foundation for long-term
success.
33
2025-910A
Goal 1: All people in Gainesville enjoy arts as part of their daily
life and neighbors will have access to programming that
reflect s their identity.
Access to cultural experiences and a strong community of cultural organizations, artists, and
institutions are critical to a community’s state of wellbeing. Arts provide an opportunity for
communities to gather and celebrate their identities, foster mutual understanding and empathy
across diverse groups, and cultivate pride in the Gainesville community. Additionally, to achieve
equitable access to the arts, we must ensure that the arts themselves are inclusive of the
diverse communities that enjoy them. Thsi means that neighbors of all backgrounds can see
themselves represented in the cCity’s arts and culture. The long-term effect of having arts and
culture as part of every resident’s everyday experience will create a stronger and healthier
Gainesville.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Number and types of arts and culture programs available at low- or no cost
• Number of cCity-funded cultural organizations
• Demographics of participants at cCity arts/cultural programs
• Percentage of cCity contract spending on arts awarded to locally owned, minority-
owned, or otherwise disadvantaged businesses
Objective 1.1 – Develop and foster cultural and arts programming that is
culturally -enriching.
Policy 1.1.1 Grow the arts community by strengthening thec City’s partnerships with artists
and community organizations and are representative of the makeup of the city .
The cCity will expand its reach into communities through programs directed at
inclusive collaborations.
Priority actions include:
a. Develop internal processes that support transparency in selection of artists,
partners and collaborators.
a.b. Work with established cultural organizations to enhance their reach by
identifying areas of need such as space, resources, and support, connecting
organizations with those resources, and through workshops with City-funded
agencies.
b.c. Partner with organizations to identify and cultivate emerging local artists,
showcase their work, and train alongside more established artists.
c.d. Partner with local organizations to provide programs that are
representative, culturally important, and aimed at youth and seniors.
d.e. Facilitate collaboration between Gainesville’s institutions of higher
education (including UF and Santa Fe College) and to grow community
34
2025-910A
interest and exposure to the arts (e.g. open workshops with visiting artists,
students, and the community); engaging art students to work with neighbors
on projects; and exploring opportunities with programs that raise the level of
community wellness through the arts.
e.f. Encourage PRCA’s teams to collaborate across programming to broaden
exposure and opportunities to the arts, thus breaking down silos and
fostering positive outcomes for our neighbors.
Policy 1.1.2 Break down barriers artists and arts organizations encounter when seeking to
participate in cCity programs.
Priority actions include:
a. Explore opportunities to reduce application burdens by simplifying required
materials, streamlining review steps, clarifying evaluation criteria, and
improving outreach to broaden access to opportunities.Revisit application
requirements to reduce the burden on potential applicants. Oftentimes,
artists and organizations aiming to participate in City programs must go
through extensive application processes that require time and energy to
complete, especially for larger City arts grants, which may discourage under-
resourced organizations from applying. Grants are primarily advertised on
the City website and on City social media sites, and calls for artists are
similarly promoted, making information less likely to reach artists or
communities that lack arts organizations.
b. Conduct outreach to organizations in historically excluded communities to
build awareness of cCity grants, support in the application process.
c. Develop or revise internal processes that promote transparency and reduce
barriers for city-produced activities where artists or art organizations of
cultural importance have historically been excluded.
d. Continually seek and receive feedback to identify and remove any other
barriers to participation.
Policy 1.1.3 Expand cultural offerings at schools and senior centers to reach kids and elders
from all neighborhoods and foster new audiences forc City programming. The
City will provide programming that caters to a multi-generational audience by
dedicating an arts education staff and establishing ongoing arts education
programming. Through this, the cCity will be able to reach new audiences of all
ages, particularly in underserved neighborhoods; promote the importance and
positive effect of the arts; and cultivate artists and/or arts enthusiasts in
Gainesville youth.
Priority actions include:
a. Identify spaces where collaborations for inclusive art programs can be held.
b. Cooperate with the Alachua County Public Schools to enhance arts education
through advocacy of the arts and support extracurricular arts programs.
35
2025-910A
c. Hostld an annual art show at the Historic Thomas Center that showcases art
produced by students in the Alachua County Public Schools system.
Policy 1.1.4 Undertake Results-Based Accountability training for all PRCA programmatic staff,
including the Cultural Affairs team. Identify overall results that align with the
department’s mission and city’s strategic initiatives.
Priority actions include:
a. The cCity will create performance measures based on those identified results
for the department that address deficiencies in programming and services.
Performance measures are tied to all levels of activities including, programs,
services, staffing, teams, and the department.
b. Track data trends through reporting over time for performance measures,
disaggregating data when appropriate to identify areas of need. Use a team
approach to review the reporting and implement strategies that address
deficiencies.
Policy 1.1.5 Work with community organizations and conduct inclusive outreach to ensure
the City’s cultural programming reflects the diversity of Gainesville’s residents.
The City will create ongoing processes to hear from our community and to learn
how programming can better serve all our neighbors. City staff will work with
partners and trusted “communicators,” organizations and individuals with strong
ties to neighborhoods in Gainesville, who will forge bonds with communities
outside the downtown corridor in order to attract new audiences to City and City-
partnered programming, share feedback to inform the design of City programs,
and share information with neighbors about available programs.
Priority actions include:
a. Evaluate whether neighbors feel represented in the City’s cultural programs
by conducting engagement with neighbors for input and asking for
suggestions for improvement.
b. Work with grassroots organizations, and marketing and PR agencies to build
awareness of and audiences for City and City-partnered programming.
c. Use non-traditional City venues for arts programming to increase accessibility
from neighborhoods outside Downtown including City recreation centers and
places where the community gathers.
Policy 1.1.6 Continue to annually recognize individuals, organizations, and businesses for
their contribution to the advancement of arts and culture in our community .The
city continues to recognize those entities that have utilized arts and culture in
ways to enhance our community’s wellbeing, cultural identity, and city
beautification. The nominations process shall be transparent with the Cultural
Affairs Board, and Arts in Public Places Trust shall review and vote on the
36
2025-910A
applications to ensure they are fair and inclusive of the cultural makeup of our
community
Objective 1.2 – Create and support the physical environment that fosters
growth and inclusivity in the cultural arts landscape.
Policy 1.2.1 Inventory and evaluate current city-owned facilities and spaces to determine if
they meet the needs of the cultural community.
Policy 1.2.2 Identify and prioritize renovations, and/or upgrades to facilities and spaces to
meet the needs of the cultural community.
Policy 1.2.3 Maintain current city-owned facilities and spaces that support the presentation
of arts.
Policy 1.2.4 Identify gaps in community facilities or spaces needed for the presentation of
arts to guide or develop new facilities or spaces to fill those gaps.
Policy 1.2.5 Identify ways in which spaces can be made affordable for individuals or small
organizations to produce arts and culture programming.
Policy 1.2.6 Identify gaps in arts and culture that specifically address the cultural identity and
heritage of underrepresented communities.
Objective 1.3 – Fund public art projects through the City’s Art in Public Places
Trust (APPT) Ordinance, that dictates mandates allocating at least one (1)
percent of the cost of new, renovated and/or expanded public buildings, to
art.
Policy 1.3.1 The Cultural Affairs Team, PRCA Department, and other City departments shall
utilize the APPT for call to artists, proposal review, and public art decision
making issues that may arise (relocation, maintenance, etc.)
Policy 1.3.2 The Cultural Affairs Team shall provide a transparent and open process for all
artists, individuals and organizations that wish to work with the City on public
art.
Policy 1.3.3 The Cultural Affairs Team shall work with APPT to ensure that public art is
representative of the City’s demographic and cultural makeup, while addressing
deficits in art presented historically-excluded communities.
37
2025-910A
Historic Preservation Section
Goal 2: Gainesville is a thriving and vibrant community with a
strong sense of history. Innovative policies and procedures
continue to preserve and protect Gainesville’s historic,
archaeological, and cultural resources.
Historic preservation is a critical tool that can help older, culturally significant communities
continue to thrive in the spaces in which they have a familiar way of life. Historic buildings,
community centers, stores, places of worship, parks, street corners, and public services are all
important aspects of the city that form our sense of community.
The City will ensure that everybody has a seat at the table when determining what holds cultural
value and what needs to be protected. This includes expanding the historic preservation criteria
so that it is more inclusive and considers intangible heritage and social values. This will provide
38
2025-910A
communities with the opportunity to preserve a more diverse range of assets than under
stringent integrity requirements for architectural significance that have traditionally been used.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Number of recorded historic assets by neighborhood.
• Expanded protection of culturally significant neighborhoods beyond current districts.
• Increase in financial incentives and grants specifically to assist heritage homeowners
Objective 2.1 – Strengthen the role of historic resources as integral features of
the public realm by ensuring they are well managed, well maintained, and
contribute positively to Gainesville’s quality of life . Historic resources are
integral features of the public realm. Historic properties that are well
managed and maintained contribute to the positive quality of life for
Gainesville’s citizens.
Policy 2.1.1 Continually update and expand the citywide inventory of Gainesville’s cultural
and historic resources through survey and documentation.
Policy 2.1.2 Increase the number of historic resources and districts listed in the local and/or
the National Register of Historic Places.
Policy 2.1.3 Identify potential historic preservation priorities within neighborhood planning
efforts that incorporate community engagement or other large-scale planning
projects.
Policy 2.1.4 Seek funding to develop a city-wide archaeological sensitivity map and amend
preservation codes to provide a process for the identification and protection of
significant archaeological sites.
Policy 2.1.5 Expand existing designation efforts to include thematic resource districts, such
as architecturally unique themes (chert construction,), social context and
significant events (locations of Civil Rights activities,), and historic industries
important in Gainesville’s past (agricultural history).
Policy 2.1.6 Explore potential incentives and benefits that will encourage the rehabilitation
and restoration of structures constructed pre-1975 in Gainesville’s downtown .
Policy 2.1.7 Ensure that projects and designs within the public realm recognize and identify
existing historic significance, integrating historic fabric and elements within
those projects, especially those undertaken by the City.
Policy 2.1.8 Update inventories of city-owned historic resources and identify maintenance
needs of historic facilities to provide high-quality experiences for residents and
visitors.
39
2025-910A
Policy 2.1.9 Enact policies that provide additional funding streams to specifically support the
restoration of public historic facilities and create a historic preservation grant
program.
Policy 2.1.10 Continue coordination with the Florida Division of Historic Resources (FDHR) with
updating the Florida Master Site File.
Objective 2.2 – Incorporate sustainability efforts and practices into the
Historic Preservation Program. is seen as a key component to sustainable
development and supports the City’s efforts in achieving its Zero Waste
Initiative.
Policy 2.2.1 Promote preservation’s role in community sustainability efforts, including land
conservation, the retention of embodied energy in existing buildings, and
reduced demolition waste.
Policy 2.2.2 Reduce barriers to adaptive use and the rehabilitation of historic structures.
Pursue code relief or similar measures that actively encourage the reuse of older
structures by reducing costs and streamlining reviews.
Policy 2.2.3 When updating the preservation ordinance or design guidelines, include
sustainability objectives such as alternative energy options, sustainable
materials, or other retrofits that increase sustainability.
Policy 2.2.4 Review and propose Land Development Code amendments that will require the
conservation of resources and usable building materials such as architectural
salvage and deconstruction before demolition creates additional construction
waste.
Policy 2.2.5 Consider code revisions so that historic preservation policies can support and
enhance the City’s land use, housing, transportation, and economic development
policies.
Objective 2.3 – Create iIncentives and benefits that support appropriate
rehabilitation and the continued use of historic resources.
Policy 2.3.1 Offer financial incentives that stimulate investment in historic properties,
emphasizing programs focused on low-income homeowners and naturally
occurring affordable housing throughout the city.
Policy 2.3.2 Expand demolition review procedures to improve the protection of culturally
significant resources, especially within neighborhoods that have typically been
underrepresented through designation. Provide mitigation procedures for
demolition requests.
40
2025-910A
Policy 2.3.3 Encourage collaborations with economic development and housing organizations
that can bring attention and investments to the rehabilitation of historic
properties.
Policy 2.3.4 Continue to allow hardship exemptions in historic districts for low-income
residents to use alternative, more affordable options in place of specified historic
materials and designs.
41
2025-910A
Goal 3: The City’s Historic Preservation Program is efficient,
compatible with other related codes, and easy to interpret.
Objective 3.1 – Review and update the historic preservation ordinance and
design guidelines to ensure the Historic Preservation program is adequately
responding to current challenges and community interests.
Policy 3.1.1 Maintain a robust and accredited Hhistoric Ppreservation Pprogram through the
State’s Certified Local Government initiative and when possible, participate in
established programs that actively support preservation at the local level, such
as Florida Main Street Communities.
Policy 3.1.2 Adapt historic preservation code and procedures to ensure that social and
cultural significance is included in historic designation considerations and
processes.
Policy 3.1.3 Develop streamlined permitting and other incentives for compatible and
appropriate infill development and additional density (such as accessory
dwelling units or ADU’s)ADU’s) in historic districts that align with city guidelines
and goals to promote long-term affordable housing.
Policy 3.1.4 Maintain interdepartmental dialogue to cultivate a strong understanding of the
Historic Preservation program, the correct application of its initiatives, and
opportunities for collaboration.
Policy 3.1.5 Review existing city codes and processes outside of the historic preservation
ordinance to ensure that they are aligned and are compatible with historic
preservation goals. Enhance existing collaborative efforts with code enforcement
to create a clear process for addressing deteriorating historic resources and
provide enforceable consequences for demolition by neglect cases.
Policy 3.1.6 Identify additional incentives that will alleviate financial impacts to residents in
historic districts that meet the public benefit goal of access and inclusion such as
reduced or simplified review requirements.
Objective 3.2 – The Historic Preservation Board will operate in a transparent
manner.
Policy 3.2.1 Promote collaboration between the Historic Preservation Board and City
departments, other boards, the City Commission, and local academic institutions
and universities.
Policy 3.2.2 Create communication materials in diverse and accessible formats to educate
residents, property owners, business owners and developers on Historic
Preservation Board activities and available preservation programs, tools, and
incentives.
42
2025-910A
Goal 4: Gainesville’s Historic Preservation Pprogram balances
smart growth with the preservation of cultural identities and
resources.
Objective 4.1 – Manage growth and infill development within historic districts
and of historic or culturally -significant structures or areas.
Policy 4.1.1 Create policy initiatives and programs that allow preservation to play a role in
mitigating displacement and strengthening cultural heritage in neighborhoods
that have traditionally been underrepresented.
Policy 4.1.2 Support the reuse of historic structures into needed uses such as housing,
community spaces, or other neighborhood-serving functions.
Policy 4.1.3 Discourage the unnecessary demolition of older viable structures through a range
of methods that lead to adaptive use, even if they are not designated as historic.
Policy 4.1.4 Encourage deconstruction practices, including updating permitting requirements
and material reuse standards.
Policy 4.1.5 Establish more robust ways to preserve and celebrate places and features of
historic and cultural significance that are outside historic districts.
Objective 4.2 – The Historic Preservation Pprogram will protect more places of
significance in underrepresented neighborhoods.
Policy 4.2.1 Evaluate and update local criteria for architectural integrity, survey and
assessment practices, and methods of defining eligible district boundaries to
ensure they do not perpetuate exclusion.
Policy 4.2.2 Explore approaches to preservation that address historic erasure and empower
heritage protection.
Policy 4.2.3 Create eligibility criteria for buildings, sites, or neighborhoods that are culturally
significant in nature more than solely architecturally significant.
Policy 4.2.4 Provide tools to educate the community about Gainesville’s history and its
historic resources, focusing on areas and populations currently
underrepresented in the Gainesville local register of historic places.
43
2025-910A
44
Where We Live
2025-910A
Where We Live
Housing Section
Where We Are and How We Got Here
Gainesville is home to many dynamic communities and neighborhoods but many residents
across the city live in neighborhoods that have limited access to basic services and resources.
Ongoing needs include resources such as pedestrian mobility via sidewalks, access to
transportation options, health and wellbeing services, childcare, grocery stores, community
parks, and open spaces. At the heart of many of these disparities is access to and distribution of
housing. There is a significant and increasing need for housing which is safe, affordable,
provides access to services, and creates opportunities for economic mobility.
Availability and location of housing impacts all aspects of life in a city. Instability in housing can
lead to poor health, reduced educational outcomes, loss of employment, and many other
negative impacts. Low and moderate-income families struggle to purchase homes which
restricts one of the primary investments that can build multi-generational wealth to those who
can afford homeownership. Individual impacts such as these limit Gainesville residents’ ability
to participate and thrive in the local economy and ensure economic stability for themselves and
their families.
The distribution and limited access to housing in Gainesville stems from several causes
including:
• Limited ability for City government to directly construct affordable housing
developments
• Restricted ability to require that new construction projects include affordable housing
and other community benefits for current residents
• Limited ability to financially support rehabilitation of existing affordable housing
• Laws and regulations such as land use and zoning restrictions, which limit housing
construction to “traditional” one- or two-family homes, and conflicting land use patterns
that restrict construction of housing based on lot size limitations
• Neglect and underinvestment in existing housing stock and utilities, leading to
dilapidated conditions
• Historic discrimination in leasing, rental, and mortgage practices against low-income
residents
• Lending policies that limit funding for housing construction, especially non-conventional
housing types, and renovations that could upgrade the existing housing stock
• High and ever-rising construction costs that result in higher costs for starter homes and
higher rents for residents
45
2025-910A
• Existing market conditions that incentivize continued construction of new housing units
designed to accommodate student populations specifically
• Growing disparity in wealth distribution, leading to housing prices that outpace
workforce salaries
While development and construction of housing has maintained a steady pace of growth in
Gainesville since 2017, it has not kept up with the demand and has not led to a more affordable
local housing market. From 2017 to 2022, many new large-scale housing projects prioritized
student housing and above market-rate monthly rental costs. This development trend occurred
largely along central thoroughfares and near the University of Florida campus and provided
much higher density development while utilizing fewerp ublic resources per unit or household.
However, muchMuch of this development has been criticized for changing the social
characteristics of established neighborhoods, failing to provide “missing-middle,” workforce, or
affordable housing on a meaningful scale. At the same time, new single-family housing units are
constructed largely on the periphery of the city. These units are not affordable to many
residents and are not located within proximity to major employment and commercial sectors,
thus requiring long commutes and new transportation and utility infrastructure. This expansion
of single-family development to the southwest and north of the city could threaten to repeat
previous sprawling development patterns if not offset or balanced across the City.
Progress to Build On
Housing access has been established as a primary focus for the City since at least 2018 and a
variety of work has taken place since that time to address the issue. In 2020, the City contracted
with the Florida Housing Coalition to develop a Housing Action Plan. That plan recommended
programs, policies, and funding sources to create and preserve quality affordable housing in
Gainesville. More specifically, the plan identified the following formula for a community that is
successfully addressing affordable housing:
• Land use planning that is responsive to the need for housing that is affordable;
46
2025-910A
• Diverse and focused financial resources to create and preserve quality affordable
housing in Gainesville; and
• Government and nonprofit focus on long-term affordability and equitable
(re)development.
The Plan comprises three (3) Major Categories and includes thirteen (13) proposed Strategies or
Recommendations. It also provides implementation schedules over a five-year period;
summarized as Long-Term (2-5 years), Medium-Term (1-2 years) and Short-Term (less than 1
year). The finalized draft and the supporting staff work plan were presented to the City
Commission on January 5, 2022.
Simultaneously in 2021, the City contracted with HR&A Consultants to investigate housing
inequity in Gainesville, how exclusionary land use controls drive local housing market trends,
and how changes to exclusionary land controls could begin to make housing in Gainesville
achievable for more people. The Exclusionary/Inclusionary Zoning study found that exclusionary
zoning regulations like large lot sizes, wide setbacks, and low densities directly limit housing
supply in residential areas, increase the cost to build new housing (based on strict design
standards), and limit the use of existing housing. While Gainesville is actively making informed
policy changes based on the findings from this study, additional work is still needed to further
promote housing choice, diversity, and affordability.
To further promote affordable housing subsidization, the City uses several federal, state, and
local funding sources for down payment assistance, home repairs, and other projects. Federal
sources include the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program and the HOME
Investment Partnerships (HOME) Program. The use of these funds is governed by the City’s Five-
Year Consolidated Plan, which must be submitted to, and approved by, the US Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Other federal affordable housing funding sources
include the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA), and the HOME American Rescue Plan (HOME-
ARP).
The State Housing Initiatives Partnership (SHIP) Program provides funding for affordable
housing to qualified local governments throughout the State of Florida. The adopted Local
Housing Assistance Plan (LHAP) describes how the City will use SHIP funds to expand
production and preserve affordable housing. In particular, Gainesville’s LHAP emphasizes
strategies to rehabilitate owner occupied homes, provide down payment assistance to first time
homebuyers, provide mortgage foreclosure prevention assistance, provide disaster assistance,
provide counseling and training to homebuyers and homeowners, and provide financial support
for the development of new affordable housing. These strategies are intended to increase the
availability of affordable residential units by combining local resources and cost saving
measures into a local housing partnership and using public and private funds to reduce the cost
of housing.
In addition to federal and state sources, the City has developed the ConnectFree Program,
which is funded by a local surcharge on new water and wastewater connections to Gainesville
47
2025-910A
Regional Utilities (GRU). The City uses this program to pay for a majority of the cost of providing
water and wastewater infrastructure to qualified new affordable housing projects .
Also at the local level, the City has taken the following initiatives: establishing a Community
Land Trust program that builds permanently affordable housing; and developing the Heartwood
subdivision which was created following substantial community involvement. The City has
pursued multiple initiatives to expand affordable housing. One initiative is the creation of a
Community Land Trust that produces permanently affordable homes. A separate effort is the
development of the Heartwood subdivision, a mixed ni come neighborhood shaped through
extensive community engagement and offering homeownership opportunities for low and
moderate income households as well as market rate homes. This mixed-income neighborhood
includes home ownership opportunities for low- and moderate-income households, as well as
market rate homes. These types of projects are examples of public-private partnerships that
can work towards the goal of providing affordable housing in Gainesville.
In addition to assistance and action plans, Land Development Code amendments were adopted
to allow for more diverse housing types. For example, accessory dwelling units are permissible
within most zoning districts in the city and single-room occupancy residences are permissible in
a majority of high-density residential and commercial and mixed-use zoning districts.
Additionally, the inclusionary zoning (IZ) changes transformed requirements and incentives
around affordable housing; new development of 50 units or more within certain zoning districts
must provide some of the units as affordable housing. New development not required to provide
affordable housing may opt-in to the requirements to receive certain incentives/offsets. To
expand housing diversity and flexibility in single-family neighborhoods, minimum lot size, width
standards, and setbacks were reduced to facilitate the creation of smaller lots where infill
development could occur. These changes to the Land Development Code contribute to the shift
in policymaking to address the rising cost of housing and needs of our community.
What’s at stake?
Ensuring that neighbors in Gainesville have access to quality and affordable housing is one of
the most important strategies for ensuring this city is a great place to live and work. Today,
many Gainesville residents lack access to transit, jobs, housing, and a variety of services. In
addition to the historic economic and social factors that have limited some residents’ ability to
thrive, there are many other groups of residents who live under severe rent burden and have
very few quality housing options. By addressing these housing issues, the City of Gainesville can
become a place that provides health and opportunity for each of its residents while also
creating a more resilient and sustainable local economy.
48
2025-910A
Housing Section
Goal 1: All people in Gainesville have the opportunity to live in
neighborhoods with diverse and abundant housing and easy
access to jobs and vital community services.
In Gainesville, access to abundant, stable housing is not equally guaranteed. Over the past
decade, the number of housing units in the city grew by 10.4%, which was outpaced by
population growth which rose by 13.4% in the same period. This discrepancy resulted in a 2%
decrease in the citywide vacancy rate, – from 11% to 9%. The impacts of this discrepancy are
not equally distributed: the local housing market continues to deliver a range of housing units
oriented towards students near the University of Florida, as well as larger detached single-
family homes in the western part of the city and often neglects housing between these two ends
of the spectrum. The real-life impacts of this neglect fall upon seniors, single-person
households, or neighbors earning below the median wage in Gainesville. Allocating public
investment funds and incentivizing private investment toward housing and vital community
services can build community wealth, support community wellness, and connect a broader
range of residents to economic opportunities. This approach, combined with an emphasis on
encouraging affordable housing and its placement near neighborhood services, will lead to real
improvements that benefit those most susceptible to housing instability, including seniors,
residents with disabilities, and residents within the low-to-moderate income categories.
49
2025-910A
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Homeownership (rate of homeownership, disparity ratio)
• Rental Vacancy rates
• Number of new housing units
• Location of new housing units
• Housing units by type (single-family, multi-family, etc.)
• Geographic mobility within City
• Percent of cost-burdened households
Objective 1.1 – Ensure new housing production meets demand based on
population growth.
Policy 1.1.1 Identify and remove barriers from the City’s Land Development Code which limit
the construction of new housing, restrict the diversity of housing forms within the
City, limit the use or rehabilitation of existing housing, or otherwise unnecessarily
increase the cost of creating housing.
Policy 1.1.2 Identify target areas for continued improvement to the review and permitting
process for residential development and construction, with the purpose of
simplifying and expediting review wherever possible.
Policy 1.1.3 Collaborate with housing material suppliers, vendors, contractors and
developers to find strategies of lowering the cost of housing production.
Policy 1.1.4 Identify the needs of different communities by conducting assessments such as a
Consider conducting a housing needs assessment which would include using
metrics such as citywide housing needs by current demographics, anticipated
population growth and characteristics, geographic sub-area, income level, type
of housing, and existing gaps in the existing housing market. This analysis should
be completed in, which will be completed in collaboration with community
organizations and partners, and should define indicators such as including (but
not limited to) housing needs by income level, assess residential displacement
risks and anti-displacement strategies, identification ofify opportunity sites for
affordable housing development, recommendations for zoning and land use
changes, and should seek to build community understanding of affordable
housing options and tradeoffs.
Policy 1.1.5 Support complete communities by implementing strategies from the various City
of Gainesville Affordable Housing Plans, such as (but not limited to) the Local
Housing Assistance Plan (LHAP) and the Consolidated Plan, including:
a. Diversifying funding sources for affordable housing
b. Increasing zoning flexibility to create more rental and owner housing
c. Promoting long-term affordability to stabilize neighborhoods
50
2025-910A
Policy 1.1.6 Enhance existing underserved neighborhoods that lack convenient access to
basic services such as health care, grocery stores, transit, recreation, and
entertainment by attracting desirable uses through regulations and incentives.
The creation of new community resources will improve quality of life and livability
for neighborhoods across the city.
a. Identify and map existing underserved and low-income neighborhoods to
ensure that City resources are allocated to support priority projects and
initiatives.
b. Facilitate the development of these uses and facilities by reviewing existing
land use and zoning designations in identified neighborhoods and, if
necessary, amending these designations to accommodate needed uses.
c. Review and implement economic development strategies and incentives to
introduce needed services and amenities. Public funding and partnerships
should be focused to accommodate the development of these uses.
Policy 1.1.7 Collaborate with the University of Florida, Santa Fe College and other educational
institutions to provide ongoing advocacy for the development of student housing
on and off campus to meet the needs of low-income students, families and
graduate students.
Policy 1.1.8 Continue to create City policies that support permanently affordable
homeownership for income-qualified households.
Policy 1.1.9 Preserve and improve existing public housing and support new innovative
housing models to serve the needs of residents at extremely low and very low-
income levels through the implementation of the following strategies:
a. Leverage funds from existing local sources such as ConnectFree and GCRA
Gainesville Community Reinvestment Area and develop new funding sources
to support local housing initiatives as well as programs such as Low-Income
Housing Tax Credit and State Apartment Incentive Loan projects.
b. Increase access to public housing locations via public transit through actions
such as adding bus routes and bus stops, increasing routes and decreasing
headways, and continuing the “First mile/last mile” program.
c. Policy 1.1.10 Establish a “Task Force” to improve coordination between
agencies to increase investment and reduce disparities in access to housing and
other opportunitiesimprove coordination among and between government
agencies. The Task Force would work to increase investment and reduce
disparities in access to opportunity in East Gainesville. At a minimum, the Task
Force would invite representatives from the Alachua County School District, the
Chamber of Commerce, the University of Florida, Santa Fe College, the
Gainesville Housing Authority, the Alachua County Housing Authority, the State
Department of Health, Alachua County (Growth Management, Housing, and
Social Services) and the City of Gainesville.
51
2025-910A
Policy 1.1.110 Assist housing developers in identifying sites for moderate-income, low-income,
very low-income, and extremely low-income housing through the First Step
Program.
Objective 1.2 – Create and maintain vibrant, thriving neighborhoods while
revitalizing neighborhoods that have experienced disrepair and neglect .
Policy 1.2.1 Facilitate continued collaboration with residents and resident groups on
expressed issues of neighborhood concern.
Policy 1.2.2 Maintain and rehabilitate publicly owned infrastructure and facilities in older
neighborhoods in order to prevent neighborhood decline.
Policy 1.2.3 Identify historically significant housing and promote the conservation and
restoration of housing that has special historic, architectural or aesthetic values.
Policy 1.2.4 Help neighborhoods develop plans that address neighborhood stability, housing,
safety, infrastructure, and historic resources.
Policy 1.2.5 Facilitate communication and dialogue with neighborhood groups regarding
proposed development in and around their neighborhoods.
Policy 1.2.6 Coordinate and fund (if feasible) the efforts of non-profit agencies such as the
Neighborhood Housing and Development Corporation and the Central Florida
Community Action Agency (CFCAA), to provide assistance for housing
conservation and rehabilitation in low-income, very low-income, and extremely
low-income redevelopment areas of the City.
Policy 1.2.7 Investigate the feasibility of an in-town affordable housing program that would
utilize pre-approved housing designs that are appropriate for specific locations
where affordable housing should be encouraged. In exchange for the provision of
affordable housing, the approved plans and associated building permits would
receive associated offsets including expedited permitting, development bonuses
outlined by the Land Development Code, and more.
52
2025-910A
Goal 2: Development in Gainesville does not displace residents
and provides benefits for existing neighbors.
Family-owned properties with cultural and historical value must be respected, protected and
weaved into redevelopment initiatives. Residents should become a part of the growth and
development efforts of the community and take ownership and pride in the negihborhood’s
growth successes and the City should develop initiatives to reinvest in these neighborhoods and
enable and encourage current residents to remain.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Population changes
• Displacement risk
• Housing cost burden
• Number of units developed, redeveloped, rehabilitated, and demolished
• Proximity to food access, health care centers, schools, jobs, financial services, and
public services
• Homeownership rate
• Home sales and mortgage originations
• Number of foreclosure auctions
53
2025-910A
Objective 2.1 – Support housing development that benefits new and current
residents equally equitably.
Policy 2.1.1 Develop a consistent data collection protocol and methodology to track and
report instances of displacement and identify neighborhood-scale risk factors to
prioritize anti-displacement intervention efforts.
Policy 2.1.2 Develop and seek funding for anti-displacement programs and projects informed
by data to stabilize lower-income neighborhoods that may be vulnerable to
displacement including:
a. Supporting community land trusts with funding, coordination of resources,
and technical assistance
b. Funding programs such as the Welcome Back down payment program to
stabilize neighborhoods and support retention of existing long-term residents
while encouraging relocation of former residents back to the neighborhood.
c. Funding and implementing programs designed to retrofit rental (without
increasing the cost of rent) and owner-occupied properties with energy
efficiency upgrades and housing rehabilitation renovations to allow residents
to live in existing homes in safe and affordable housing.
d. Utilizing funding sources to provide eviction intervention assistance to low-
income residents in priority neighborhoods.
e. Continuing to implement neighborhood stabilization strategies such as The
Mortgage Foreclosure Intervention Program, and increased tenant
protections.
f. Developing and funding a program designed to provide rehousing assistance
to low-income tenants in instances where existing occupied rental housing
units are being demolished to accommodate new development .
Policy 2.1.3 Rezone and amend land use designations for additional areas of the City
to allow for a variety of housing types.
Policy 2.1.4 Support program and regulatory reforms which establish requirements to
incorporate permanent affordable housing in all City funded residential and
mixed-use developments.
Policy 2.1.5 Continue to implement and refine an Inclusionary Zoning policy based on market
data within the City applicable to new multi-family development projects.
Identify and address barriers to the implementation and expansion of
Inclusionary Zoning.
Policy 2.1.6 Continue to seek funds from both the State and Federal government to provide
financial assistance to first time moderate-income, low-income, very low-
income, and extremely low-income homebuyers.
Policy 2.1.7 Collaborate with Alachua County to set aside funds for temporary housing
vouchers.
54
2025-910A
Policy 2.1.8 Investigate permanent housing such as and similar to the Explore long-term
homeownership strategies for the City to implement or support, such as a dDown
pPayment aAssistance pProgram (DPA) or Community Land Trust (CLT)
community land trusts, to which promotes expand access to stable and
permanently- affordable homeownershiphousing.
Policy 2.1.9 Explore options for development proposals to include an analysis of community
impacts from the project and identify strategies to address harmful impacts such
as displacement pressure or provide new community benefits.
55
2025-910A
Goal 3: All people in Gainesville have access to safe, affordable,
quality, and stable housing.
Ensuring that all people in Gainesville have access to safe, affordable, quality, and stable
housing requires a balance between cost and safety. This goal emphasizes expanding the supply
of affordable units while ensuring that housing is standardized, safe, and suitable for long-term
stability. The intent of this section is to increase access to housing that reduces public reliance
on substandard housing by supporting a range of housing options across income levels. Public
housing initiatives and other supportive programs will be consolidated and expanded to provide
real alternatives for low- and moderate-income households, ensuring that affordability and
livability go hand in hand.
Initiatives such as partnering with employers to develop an Employer-Assisted Housing (EAH)
program will support workforce housing for low and moderate-income residents. Additionally,
providing incentives to developers and contractors, reducing fees, and utilizing available
funding resources will demonstrate dedication to building and preserving housing.
Additional federal, State of Florida and local revenue streams (CDBG, HOME, SAIL, General
Fund/Revenue) provide funding resources to support housing initiatives. Finally, committing to
energy efficiency could greatly impact the overall financial stabilization or burden of housing
costs for many households. This efficiency impacts health, employment, and disposable income.
56
2025-910A
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Number of affordable housing units (by AMI per FHC, public vs private, Inclusionary-
zoning driven)
• Property maintenance code cases that are resolved without demolition
• Housing-related gGrants applied for and received
• Average housing cost over time
• Average age of housing stock
Objective 3.1 – Ensure the proliferation and long -term preservation support of
existing affordable housing through coordinated funding, partnerships, and
incentives.
Policy 3.1.1 Facilitate the direct allocation of funds from programs such as SHIP, CDBG,
HOME, LIHTC, DBG, and GCRA to maintain or increase funding for affordable
housing initiatives.
Policy 3.1.2 Implement the Housing Rehabilitation Program through continued or expanded
use of CDBG, HOME and SHIP funds, or other sources.
Policy 3.1.3 Coordinate with the City Lobbyist to support full funding for the SHIP program
from the State legislature.
Policy 3.1.4 Track efficacy of funding sources spent on the creation of local, affordable
housing supply to ensure that partners and programs with the greatest impact
are rewarded for their impact with increased resources to build new affordable
housing. Consolidate resources to ensure the most effective programs are
sufficiently funded.
Policy 3.1.5 Designate surplus City land to for-profit and not-for-profit organizations for
perpetually affordable housing development, through mechanisms such as, but
not limited to, inclusionary zoning, community land trusts, deed restrictions, or a
shared equity model. Where feasible, ensure that surplus land used for housing is
implemented at the highest and best use. Encourage density, pedestrian-scale
design, and a mix of uses.
Policy 3.1.6 Leverage public investments to recapitalize existing LIHTC affordable housing
projects to extend affordability restrictions.
Policy 3.1.7 Coordinate with Alachua County, the Housing Authorities, and other partners
when creating affordable housing programs and projects.
Policy 3.1.8 Expedite permitting and the review process for affordable housing and Housing
and Community Development Rehabilitation projects.
57
2025-910A
Policy 3.1.9 Create incentives for affordable housing production, including but not limited to
expedited permitting and review, zero lot line and cluster subdivisions, density
bonuses, and others as specified in the Land Development Code.
Policy 3.1.10 Continue to seek funds from the State and Federal government in order to
provide financial assistance to first time homebuyers for moderate-income, low-
income, very low-income, and extremely low-income groups.
Objective 3.2 – Preserve and enhance existing renter and owner housing
supply.
Policy 3.2.1 Review and enhance code enforcement programs that preserve and improve
quality of existing owner-occupied homes.
Policy 3.2.2 Provide educational information to residents on basic home care and
maintenance.
Policy 3.2.4 Partner with community-based organizations to target available public resources
toward deteriorating homes.
Policy 3.2.5 Develop a program to identify and prioritize neglected housing units and utilize
public funds for reinvestment in highest priority units.
Policy 3.2.6 Promote the availability of pre-approved plans for both detached and attached
accessory dwelling units and make those plans easily accessible.
Objective 3.3 – Rehabilitate substandard housing units .
Policy 3.3.1 Enforce the Minimum Housing Code by working with private homeowners and
landlords to bring substandard units into a safe, healthy condition, prioritizing
rehabilitation when feasible and removing unsafe strctures when necessary to
protect residents and improve neighborhood quality. rehabilitate substandard
units and to deconstruct or demolish dilapidated units to ensure all housing units
meet the code.
Policy 3.3.2 Inspect dangerous buildings, regardless of location, to ensure that all housing
units within the City meet the City's Minimum Housing Code .
Policy 3.3.3 Continue to spend Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and HOME funds
in accordance with an adopted multi-year plan (the Consolidated Plan).
Objective 3.4 – Provide sufficient opportunity for the siting of group homes,
foster care facilities, shelters for the homeless, and elderly housing.
Policy 3.4.1 Continue to comply with the State Department of Children and Families
regulations concerning the provision of information on requirements and
procedures for siting group homes and foster care facilities.
58
2025-910A
Policy 3.4.2 The City's Land Development Code shall designate future land use categories and
zoning districts where housing for the unhoused is allowed. Some criteria for
such designations include proximity to public transportation routes, social
service agencies, employment centers and medical services, and potential
impact on existing and future neighborhoods and businesses.
Policy 3.4.3 Address the housing needs of sub-populations within the unhoused community,
including families with children and individuals with employment, through
diverse housing models such as single-room occupancy (SRO) facilities. Assess
the efficacy of existing policies intended to encourage diverse housing models,
and determine whether additional incentives are needed.
Policy 3.4.4 Encourage the development of elderly housing nearm ixed-use areas activity
centers and bus routes by providing sufficient siting opportunities that allow
congregate living facilities in multi-family areas. near bus routes and activity
centers.
59
2025-910A
Goal 4: All people in Gainesville have fair and equitable
housing opportunities free from discriminatory practices in
lending, renting, property management, and appraisal.
Access to housing is shaped, in part, by the fairness of the systems governing financing and
rental practices. The process of qualifying for a mortgage often involves systemic barriers that
create inequitable outcomes. These barriers include large down payment requirements, strict
income and employment verification, and, in some cases, even insurance conditions. These
requirements disproportionately affect low-income households, communities of color, and
seniors. In addition to financing barriers, inequitable real estate practices, ad-valorem tax
assessments, and discriminatory rental processes further constrain housing opportunities.
Policies target these inequities across lending, appraisal, taxation, and rental markets. Through
these efforts, Gainesville can ensure that all residents have access to fair and equitable housing
opportunities.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Property tax burden by neighborhood
• Number of reported infractions of fair housing regulations
60
2025-910A
Objective 4.1 – Collaborate with City partners and leaders to investigate
discriminatory practices related to housing .
Policy 4.1.1 Collaborate on housing issues across sectors by convening a Housing Working
Group with government agencies, employers, and universities.
Policy 4.1.2 Explore options to create a matching grant/down payment assistance program in
coordination with local housing partners to support workforce housing for low
and moderate-income residents.
Policy 4.1.3 Continue implementing the Fair Housing Ordinance in the Gainesville Code of
Ordinances, making updates where needed to meet federal guidelines and
coordinating with Alachua County on conducting Fair Housing Assessments
where possible.
Policy 4.1.4 Coordinate with the Alachua County Property Appraiser and other partners to
who analyze property tax systems countywide to identify discriminatory property
assessment practices and disproportionate property tax burdens and institute
reforms and protections that eliminate these disparities.
Policy 4.1.5 Continue to support and expand programs such as probate legal services for
heirs property, legal assistance for eviction prevention, mortgage foreclosure
intervention program, housing rehabilitation program, down payment assistance
for first time homebuyers, and other programs as created or modified. Publicize
and market these programs to low-income community members. Increased
access to information will help residents more easily identify and maintain
housing. Education on the technicalities of the housing market and targeting
outreach and resources toward those with lower access to housing opportunities
should be the focus.
61
2025-910A
62
How We Build
2025-910A
How We Build
Future Land Use Section
Capital Improvements Section
Property Rights Section
Where we are and how we got here
The City is dedicated to maintaining land uses, policies, and infrastructure that support strong,
vibrant neighborhoods. This goal is best achieved through people-centered standards that
promote diverse housing and transportation options, accessible public parks, and preserved
urban natural areas. An analysis of past practices indicates that, like many cities in the United
States, local actions and policies in Gainesville such as zoning laws, lending practices, and
investment decisions have historically favored those with a vested interest in their own
communities and overall has been at the expense of others. This has created disparities in our
community for those who have not been served by the decision-making process, resulting in a
lower quality of life.
For low-income and underrepresented communities, it means dealing with the consequences of
governmental and private practices that have historically been used to disproportionately affect
growth, opportunity, and overall quality of life. Consequences include the lack of new
development in these communities, a lack of access to essential services like grocery stores and
healthcare facilities, and the inability to accrue generational wealth (wealth that gets
transferred from one generation of a family to then ext) based on property value. These
consequences have long-lasting impacts on the built environment.
Examples of past policies and tools used to further disparities include:
• Discriminatory lending practices, such as federally issued mortgage insurance and
infrastructure grants to increase white homeownership leading to appreciating values in
those areas.
• Legal segregation through municipal regulations.
• Privately initiated restrictive covenants and denying access to financing for
homeownership.
• Lack of public investment in the built environment of low-income and underrepresented
communities.
These policies widenedincreased disparities in homee ownership, opportunity (access to jobs
and quality education), the condition of housing, quality of built homes, and housing
63
2025-910A
securityoverall housing stability. Addressing these disparities in our community will make for a
more sustainable and better city overall.
The ways that we regulate construction in the built environment affect the quality of life in
communities. Laws and regulations such as exclusionary zoning laws, which limit the types of
homes that can be built in neighborhoods, contribute to the difficulties of developing housing.
Regulations such as minimum lot size requirements, minimum square footage requirements,
prohibition on multi-family homes, and excessive setbacks support a historical practice that
keeps lower-income residents separated from more affluent middle-class neighborhoods by
making the development of homes in these neighborhoods prohibitively expensive. The larger
lot size requirements also reduce the supply of land available for denser and more compact
development which would increase opportunities for more housing and would help decrease the
financial burden of single-family home developments. These legal practices have substituted
discriminatory laws and have helped to create a resulting divided built environment where some
neighborhoods lack the same opportunities as more affluent neighborhoods.
In addition to the discriminatory laws and regulations that divided Gainesville, there was a
historic lack of public investment in the public realms of underrepresented communities. This
disinvestment includes elements affecting the quality of spaces and access to important goods
and services. In comparison to Gainesville’s affluent neighborhoods, lower-income
neighborhoods experience a lack of sidewalks, bike and walking paths, green spaces and trees,
and other elements that contribute to a complete and healthy neighborhood. All Gainesville
residents should have the opportunity to enjoy a built environment designed to meet the needs
of people by having safe access to services, promoting healthy living, and fostering a sense of
community.
Progress to build on
The City of Gainesville has begun to take important, incremental steps towards creating a
community that meets the needs of all neighbors, regardless of race, culture, or socio-economic
status. Changes to the Land Development Code have been adopted in recent years which allow
for more diverse housing types across the city. Accessory dwelling units are now allowed within
all single-family zoning districts, in addition to higher density districts. Single-room occupancy
residences are also now allowed in a variety of zoning districts. Additionally, single-family
zoning has been consolidated to support small-lot development with reduced setbacks, aiming
to encourage smaller home footprints and lower initial costs for homeownership .
In 2017, the introduction of transect zones to the Land Development Code created design
standards that were intended to enhance Gainesville’s urban environment; these enhancing
design standards include landscape and frontage zones, streetscape improvements,
architectural and materials regulations, and more. While transect zones and their design
standards have contributed to enhancing the public realm, there are opportunities to expand
these enhancements beyond transect zones.
64
2025-910A
Through various City programs, Gainesville is committed to improving and investing in
neighborhoods and communities who have historically been left behind. The City’s Department
of Housing and Community Development (HCD) administers the Housing Rehabilitation Program
which helps low and very low-income households for home repairs and/or total home
replacement to improve quality of life. Beyond these examples, there are more opportunities to
support investments in neighborhoods and communities across Gainesville.
What’s at stake?
Addressing city regulations that have historically been used to create a divided built
environment will help create a city that can be enjoyed by all its citizens. Updated regulations
will also help in creating a more complete built environment that is more resilient to economic
anomalies, is more environmentally responsible and sustainable,; and affords the possibility for
all Gainesville residents to live within City limits regardless of race, color, or socio-economic
status. Adopting policies that lead to strong actions now will help to improve the quality of life
for all people in Gainesville.
65
2025-910A
Future Land Use Section
Goal 1: All people in Gainesville live in complete communities.
The future land use section shall foster the unique character of the city by directing growth and
redevelopment in a manner that: encourages and supports the importance of and challenges
associated with urban infill redevelopment; uses neighborhood centers to provide goods and
services to City residents; protects neighborhoods; distributes growth and economic activity
throughout the City in keeping with the direction of this section;p reservesmaintains quality
open space; and preserves the tree canopy of the City. The future land use section shall
promote statewide goals for compact development and efficient use of infrastructure .
Urban design standards established in the Land Development Code should enhance the sense of
place, improve the urban form, and provide for the safety and comfort of pedestrians, cyclists,
transit, and other vehicles in the City. These standards shall reflect a commitment to improve
and maintain the vitality of the City and its neighborhoods. Established standards must foster
predictable built results and a high-quality public realm with clear distinctions between urban,
suburban, and natural areas. Land development regulations shall help steer development
throughout the city in order to help create complete neighborhoods where residents have safe
and convenient access to goods and services needed in daily life such as diverse housing
options, grocery stores, schools, recreational facilities, and any other services needed by
66
2025-910A
communities. Complete neighborhoods shall be built to a walkable and bikeable human scale
and meet the needs of people of all Gainesville residents regardless of age, sex, or race.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Average distance to a park
• Percentage% of the city that is parks or conservation land
• Walkability Score
• Community perceptions of urban form and built environment in public spaces and
neighborhoods
• Capital improvement and number of built environment enhancements
• Development trends by geographic area
• AARP Livability Index
Objective 1.1 – Manage growth and promote a sustainable development
pattern through thoughtful, flexible, and diverse land uses throughout the
city.
Policy 1.1.1 Establish land use categories that allow sufficient acreage for residential,
commercial, mixed-use, office, industrial, education, agricultural, recreation,
conservation, public facility, and institutional uses at appropriate locations to
meet the needs of the projected population and that allow flexibility for the City
to consider unique, innovative, and carefully construed proposals that are in
keeping with the surrounding character and environmental conditions of specific
sites.
Policy 1.1.2 Establish land use categories associated with transect zones that are intended to
encourage a more efficient and sustainable urban form by allowing a range of
housing, employment, shopping and recreation choices and opportunities in a
compact area of the City.
Policy 1.1.3 Implement the land use categories created by this Comprehensive Plan and
regulate all development until superseded by new land development regulations.
The Land Development Code shall designate the zoning districts that implement
the land use categories created by this Comprehensive Plan. Proposed
developments that do not fall within the parameters of existing zoning districts
may be permitted to develop as Planned Developments and shall meet all the
requirements of that zoning classification and the Future Land Use Section.
Policy 1.1.4 Ensure consistency between the land use categories established herein and the
zoning districts established in the Land Development Code.
Policy 1.1.5 Ensure consistency between the underlying densities and intensities of
development within the future land use categoriesa nd the policies in the Our
Environment and How We Build Chapters of the Comprehensive Plan, providing
67
2025-910A
standards and criteria established for the protection of environmentally sensitive
land and resources.Ensure that future land use densities and development
intensities are consistent with established environmental policy objectives,
incorporating standards that conserve environmentally sensitive areas.
Policy 1.1.6 Review proposed changes to the Future Land Use Map by considering factors
such as, but not limited to, the following:
a. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan;
b. Compatibility and surrounding land uses;
c. Environmental impacts and constraints;
d. Support for urban infill and/or redevelopment;
e. Impacts on affordable housing;
f. Impacts on the transportation system;
g. An analysis of the availability of facilities and services;
h. Need for the additional acreage in the proposed future land use category;
i. Discouragement of urban sprawl as defined in Section 163.3164, F.S., and
consistent with the requirements of Subsection 163.3177(6)(a)9., F.S.;
j. Need for job creation, capital investment, and economic development to
strengthen and diversify the City’s economy; and
k. Need to modify land use categories and development patterns within
antiquated subdivisions as defined in Section 163.3164, F.S
Policy 1.1.7 Recognize Alachua County’s use of the Urban Cluster, as adopted on their Future
Land Use Map, as an urban growth boundary.
Policy 1.1.8 Certify that the entire area within current city limits meets the definition in
Chapter 163, F.S., of an urban service area, as supported by the Data and Analysis
Section.
Policy 1.1.9 Retain the Alachua County future land use designation for newly annexed lands
until the Future Land Use Section of this Comprehensive Plan is amended
Policy 1.1.10 Prepare land use amendments for all annexed properties within one year of
annexation.
Policy 1.1.1 1 Continue applying Alachua County level of service (LOS) standards until newly
annexed lands are given land use designations in this Comprehensive Plan.
68
2025-910A
Policy 1.1.12 Define the Land Use Categories on the Future Land Use Map as follows.
Implementing zoning designations appropriate for each land use designation are to be
established in the Land Development Code. Specific use categories for each zoning district are
to be defined by the Land Development Code. :
Future Land Use Categories
Single Family (SF) – up to 12 units per acre
Description
Single Family (SF) land use is appropriate for detached single-family residential development
due to topography, soil conditions, surrounding land uses, and development patterns. This
category may be used to establish transect zoning districts as defined in the Land
Development Code.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Land development regulations shall • Single-Family Detached
determine performance measures and • Places of Religious Assembly
gradations of density.
• Public and Private Schools
• Land development regulations shall
• Libraries
specify criteria for the siting of low-
• Home Occupations
intensity residential facilities to
accommodate special need • Accessory Dwelling Units
populations and appropriate
community-level institutional
facilities.
Residential Low -Density (RL) – up to 15 units per acre
Description
Residential Low-Density (RL) land use is appropriate for attached and detached single-family
development and small-scale multi-family development due to topography, soil conditions,
surrounding land uses, and development patterns.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Land development regulations shall • Single-Family Attached and Detached
determine gradations of density, • Zero-Lot Line
specific uses, and performance
• Small-Scale Multi-Family
measures.
• Places of Religious Assembly
• Developments meeting or exceeding
• Public and Private Schools
affordable housing or tree
preservation standards in the Land • Libraries
Development Code may receive up to • Bed and Breakfast
a 50% density bonus.
• Home Occupations
• Land development regulations shall
• Accessory Dwelling Units
specify criteria for the siting of low-
intensity residential facilities to
accommodate special need
populations and appropriate
69
2025-910A
Future Land Use Categories
community-level institutional
facilities.
Residential Medium -Density (RM) – 8 - 30 units per acre
Description
Residential Medium-Density (RM) land use is appropriate for medium-intensity multi-family
development due to topography, soil conditions, surrounding land uses, and development
patterns. This category may be used to establish transect zoning districts as defined in the
Land Development Code.
Density and Intensity
Lots that existed on November 13, 1991, and that are less than or equal to 0.5 acres in size
shall be exempt from minimum density requirements.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Land development regulations shall • Single-Family
determine gradations of density and • Medium-intensity Multi-Family
specific uses. • Places of Religious Assembly
• Developments meeting or exceeding
• Public and Private Schools
affordable housing or tree
• Libraries
preservation standards in the Land
• Home Occupations
Development Code may receive up to
a 50% density bonus. • Accessory Dwelling Units
• Land development regulations shall
specify criteria for the siting of
medium-intensity residential facilities
to accommodate special need
populations and appropriate
community-level institutional
facilities.
Residential High -Density (RH) – 8 – 100 units per acre .
Description
Residential High-Density (RH) land use is appropriate for high-intensity multi-family
development, and secondary retail and office uses scaled to serve the immediate
neighborhood.
70
2025-910A
Future Land Use Categories
Density and Intensity
The intensity of secondary retail and office use cannot exceed 25% of the residential floor
area. Lots that existed on November 13, 1991, and that are less than or equal to 0.5 acres in
size shall be exempt from minimum density requirements.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Land development regulations shall • Single-Family
determine gradations of density, • Medium-intensity Multi-Family
specific uses, percentage of floor area • High-intensity Multi-Family
and maximum floor area appropriate
• Places of Religious Assembly
for secondary uses.
• Public and Private Schools
• Developments meeting or exceeding
• Libraries
affordable housing or tree
• Home Occupations
preservation standards in the Land
Development Code may receive up to • Accessory Dwelling Units
a 50% density bonus.
Mixed -Use Residential (MUR) – up to 75 units per acre
Description
Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) land use is appropriate for a mixture of residential and office
uses. This category is intended primarily to be implemented by an appropriate transect
zoning district but may be used to establish special districts as outlined in the Land
Development Code.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Developments meeting or exceeding • Single-Family
affordable housing or tree • Medium-intensity Multi-Family
preservation standards in the Land • Places of Religious Assembly
Development Code may receive up to
• Public and Private Schools
a 50% density bonus.
• Community Facilities
• An essential component of the MUR
• Home Occupations
land use category is the orientation of
• Accessory Dwelling Units
structures to the street and the
• Office uses that are complementary to
pedestrian character of the area.
and secondary to the residential
• Office uses located within this district
character of the district are allowed
should be scaled to surrounding
as home occupations.
neighborhoods and institutions.
• Additional non-office uses may be
• Land development regulations shall
allowed with approval of a Special Use
set the appropriate densities,
Permit.
allowable uses, appropriate height,
design criteria, and landscaping
requirements.
Mixed -Use Office/Residential (MOR) – up to 20 units per acre
Description
71
2025-910A
Future Land Use Categories
Mixed-Use Office/Residential (MOR) land use is appropriate for residential uses and,
depending on the implementing zoning district, may allow office, professional, service, and
ancillary uses either as stand-alone uses or combined in a mixed-use development format.
This category is intended primarily to be implemented by an appropriate transect zoning
district but may be used to establish special districts as outlined in the Land Development
Code.
Density and Intensity
Developments located within this category shall be scaled to fit the character of the area.
Maximum building height shall be 3 stories.Buildings shall not exceed three stories within this
land use category.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Developments meeting or exceeding • Single-Family
affordable housing or tree • Medium-intensity Multi-Family
preservation standards in the Land • Accessory Dwelling Units
Development Code may receive up to
• Offices
a 50% density bonus.
• Professional/Business Services
• Structures in this category shall be
• Places of Religious Assembly
oriented to the street and encourage
• Public and Private Schools
multi-modal transportation through
• Community Facilities
the development design.
• Some non-office type uses, such as
• Land development regulations shall
restaurants, may be allowed with a
establish the appropriate uses, design
Special Use Permit.
criteria, landscaping, and
pedestrian/vehicular access.
Mixed -Use Low -Intensity (MUL) – 8 – 30 units per acre
Description
Mixed-Use Low-Intensity (MUL) land use is appropriate for a mixture of residential and non-
residential uses.
Density and Intensity
• Lots that existed on November 13, 1991, and that are less than or equal to 0.5 acres in
size shall be exempt from minimum density requirements.
• Unified developments that include a residential and non- residential component
(either horizontally or vertically mixed) shall not be required to meet the minimum
density requirements.
• Intensity will be controlled, in part, by adopting land development regulations that
limits buildings to 5 stories or less, with the option to increase to a maximum of 8
stories with a Special Use Permit. Intensity will be controlled, in part, by adopting
land development regulations that establish height limits of 5 stories or less; however,
height may be increased to a maximum of 8 stories with a Special Use Permit.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Developments meeting or exceeding • Single-Family
affordable housing or tree • Small-Lot Single-Family
72
2025-910A
Future Land Use Categories
preservation standards in the Land • Duplexes
Development Code may receive up to • Townhouses (attached housing)
a 50% density bonus.
• Accessory Dwelling Units
• Land development regulations shall
• Group Homes
establish thresholds for the
• Multi-Family (if compatible in scale
percentage of mixed uses for new
and character with other dwellings in
development or redevelopment of
the neighborhood)
sites 10 acres or larger.
• Offices (scaled to serve the
• At a minimum, the land development
surrounding neighborhood)
regulations shall encourage that: at
• Retail (scaled to serve the
least 10 percent of the floor area of
surrounding neighborhood)
new development or redevelopment
• Public and Private Schools
of such sites be residential; or, that
the surrounding area of equal or • Places of Religious Assembly
greater size than the development or • Community Facilities
redevelopment site, and within 1/4 • Light Assembly, Fabrication, and
mile of the site, have a residential Processing uses (within fully enclosed
density of at least 6 units per acre. structures) may be allowed with a
• Buildings in this category shall face Special Use Permit.
the street and have modest front • Residential use shall not be a required
setbacks. development component for public
• This category shall not be used to and private schools, institutions of
extend strip commercial development higher learning, places of religious
along a street. assembly and other community civic
• Land development regulations shall uses.
ensure a compact, pedestrian-friendly
environment for these areas, and
provide guidelines or standards for
the compatibility of permitted uses.
Mixed -Use Medium -Intensity (MUM) – 12 – 30 units per acre
Description
Mixed-Use Medium-Intensity (MUM) land use is appropriate for a mixture of residential, office,
and business uses concentrated in mapped areas. When implemented by the Corporate Park
zoning district, this category is appropriate for corporate office facilities and mixed-use
office-oriented development. Development shall function as a neighborhood center serving
multiple neighborhoods or a community-serving retail and/or office center.
Density and Intensity
• Lots that existed on November 13, 1991 and that are less than or equal to 0.5 acres in
size shall be exempt from minimum density requirements.
• Unified developments that include a residential and non-residential component
(either horizontally or vertically mixed) shall not be required to meet the minimum
density requirements.
73
2025-910A
Future Land Use Categories
• Intensity will be controlled, in part, by adopting land development regulations that
limit buildings to 5 stories or less, with the option to increase to a maximum of 8
stories with a Special Use PermitIntensity will be controlled, in part, by adopting land
development regulations that establish height limits of 5 stories or less; however,
height may be increased to a maximum of 8 stories with a Special Use Permit.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Developments meeting or exceeding • Single-Family
affordable housing or tree • Medium-intensity Multi-Family
preservation standards in the Land • Accessory Dwelling Units
Development Code may receive up to
• Offices
a 50% density bonus.
• Professional/Business Services
• Land development regulations shall
• Places of Religious Assembly
ensure a compact, pedestrian
• Public and Private Schools
environment for these areas, and
• Community Facilities
provide guidelines for the
compatibility of permitted uses. • Retail
• Land development regulations shall • Light assembly, fabrication, and
establish the thresholds for the processing uses within fully enclosed
percentage of mixed uses for new structures may be allowed with a
development or redevelopment of Special Use Permit.
sites 10 acres or larger. • Residential use shall not be a required
• At a minimum, the land development development component for public
regulations shall encourage that: at and private schools, institutions of
least 10 percent of the floor area of higher learning, places of religious
new development or redevelopment assembly and community facilities.
of such sites be residential; or, that
the surrounding area of equal or
greater size than the development or
redevelopment site, and within 1/4
mile of the site, have a residential
density of at least 6 units per acre.
• Buildings in this land use category
shall face the street and have modest
front setbacks.
Urban Mixed -Use (UMU) – up to 60 units per acre ; and up to
20 additional units per acre by Special Use Permit
Description
Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) land use is appropriate for residential, office, retail and serve uses
either as stand-alone uses or combined in a mixed-use development format. This category is
intended primarily to be implemented by an appropriate transect zoning district but may be
used to establish special districts as outlined in the Land Development Code.
74
2025-910A
Future Land Use Categories
Density and Intensity
• Developments located within this category shall be scaled to fit the character of the
area.
• Maximum building height shall range betweenB uildings shall not exceed 4 or4 to 5
stories, depending upon the implementing zoning district, with provisions to add up to
an additional 1 to 2 stories by ah eight bonus system as established in the Land
Development Code.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Developments meeting or exceeding • Single-Family
affordable housing or tree • Medium-intensity Multi-Family
preservation standards in the Land • Accessory Dwelling Units
Development Code may receive up to
• Places of Religious Assembly
a 50% density bonus.
• Public and Private Schools
• Structures in this category shall be
• Community Facilities
oriented to the street and encouraged
• Light assembly, fabrication, and
multi-modal transportation through
processing uses within fully enclosed
the development design.
structures shall be allowed in
• Land development regulations shall
specified zoning districts
set the appropriate densities, the
types of uses; design criteria;
landscaping;, and
pedestrian/vehicular access.
Urban Mixed -Use High Intensity (UMUH) – 10 – 100 units per
acre ; and up to 25 additional units per acre by Special Use
Permit
Description
Urban Mixed-Use High-Intensity (UMUH) land use is appropriate for residential,
office/research, retail, and service uses either as stand-alone uses or combined in a mixed-
use development format. The Urban Mixed-Use High-IntensityUMUH category is distinguished
from other mixed-use categories in that it is specifically established to support research and
development near the University of Florida main campus. An essential component of the
category is orientation of structures to the street and the multi-modal character of the area.
This category is intended primarily to be implemented by an appropriate transect zoning
district but may be used to establish special districts as outlined in the Land Development
Code.
Density and Intensity
• Developments located within this category shall be scaled to fit the character of the
area.
• Lots that existed on November 13, 1991 and that are less than or equal to 0.5 acres in
size shall be exempt from minimum density requirements.
75
2025-910A
Future Land Use Categories
• Unified developments that include a residential and non-residential component
(either horizontally or vertically mixed) shall not be required to meet the minimum
density requirements.
• Buildings shall be limited to no more than 6 stories and may be permitted to develop
up to 8 stories by the bonus system as established in the Land Development
CodeBuilding height shall be limited to 6 stories and up to 8 stories by a height bonus
system as established in the Land Development Code..
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Land development regulations shall • Single-Family
set the appropriate zoning densities: • Medium-intensity Multi-Family
the types of uses; design criteria; • High-intensity Multi-Family
landscaping;, and
• Accessory Dwelling Units
pedestrian/vehicular access.
• Places of Religious Assembly
• Developments meeting or exceeding
• Public and Private Schools
affordable housing or tree
• Light assembly, fabrication, and
preservation standards in the Land
processing uses within fully enclosed
Development Code may receive up to
structures shall be allowed in
a 50% density bonus.
specified zoning districts as specially
•
regulated by the Land Development
Code.
Urban Core (UC) – up to 150 units per acre .; and up to 25
additional units per acre by Special Use Permit
Description
Urban Core (UC) land use is appropriate for residential, office, and business uses
concentrated in the urban core area. This category is intended primarily to be implemented
by an appropriate transect zoning district but may be used to establish special districts as
outlined in the Land Development Code.
Density and Intensity
• Development in this category shall function as a center serving the urban area.
• Development within the urban core shall ensure the compact, pedestrian character of
this area.
• Buildings shall be limited to no more than 12 stories, with up to 14 stories possible via
a bonus system established in the Land Development Code.Building height shall be
limited to 12 stories, with up to 14 stories by a height bonus systems as established in
the Land Development Code.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Developments meeting or exceeding • Single-Family
affordable housing or tree • Medium-intensity Multi-Family
preservation standards in the Land
• High-intensity Multi-Family
76
2025-910A
Future Land Use Categories
Development Code may receive up to • Accessory Dwelling Units
a 50% density bonus.
• Places of Religious Assembly
• Buildings in this category shall face
• Public and Private Schools
the street and meet build-to lines
• Institutions of higher learning
established in the Land Development
Code. • Government offices
• Light assembly, fabrication, and
processing uses within fully enclosed
structures shall be allowed in
specified zoning districts as specially
regulated by the Land Development
Code.
Office (O) – up to 20 units per acre
Description
Office (O) land use is appropriate for office, residential, professional and service uses,
hospital and medical uses, and appropriate ancillary uses.
Density and Intensity
• Intensity will be controlled by adopting land development regulations that limit
structures to 5 stories or less, require buildings to face the street, and modest build-
to lines, instead of a maximum floor area ratio; however, the maximum number of
stories may be increased to a maximum of 8 with a Special Use Permit .
• Intensity will be controlled by adopting land development regulations that establish
height limits of 5 stories or less, that require buildings to face the street, and modest
build-to lines, instead of a maximum floor area ratio; however, height may be
increased to a maximum of 8 stories with a Special Use Permit.
• For hospitals and large-scale medical office facilities that are located in a Medical
Services zoning district, the height may be increased to 14 stories with a Special Use
Permit.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Developments meeting or exceeding • Single-Family
affordable housing or tree • Medium-intensity Multi-Family
preservation standards in the Land
• Accessory Dwelling Units
Development Code may receive up to
• Offices
a 50% density bonus.
• Hospitals
• Office designations shall be applied to
compact office development. • Some non-office type uses such as
• Residential uses in office districts restaurants may be allowed in this
shall be designed as new in-town land use category with a Special Use
development, mixed-use, live-work, Permit.
compound use or shall accommodate
77
2025-910A
Future Land Use Categories
existing residential development
within the Office zoning district.
• Land development regulations shall
determine the appropriate scale of
uses; and the specific criteria for the
siting of private schools and churches.
Commercial (C)
Description
Commercial (C) land use is appropriate for large-scale highway-oriented commercial uses.
This category is not appropriate for neighborhood centers.
Density and Intensity
• Intensity will be controlled by limiting buildings to 5 stories or less, requiring buildings
to face the street, and modest build-to lines, instead of a maximum floor area ratio;
however, the number of stories may be increased to a maximum of 8 with a Special
Use Permit.Intensity will be controlled by adopting height limits of 5 stories or less,
requiring buildings to face the street, and modest build-to lines instead of a maximum
floor area ratio; however, height may be increased to a maximum of 8 storiesw ith a
Special Use Permit.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Land development regulations shall • Businesses
determine the appropriate scale of • Retail
uses. • Restaurants
Business Industrial (BI)
Description
Business Industrial (BI) land use is appropriate for those areas near the Gainesville Regional
Airport for office, business, commercial and industrial uses. This category is distinguished
from other industrial and commercial categories in that it is designed specifically to allow
only uses that are compatible with the airport.
Density and Intensity
Intensity will be controlled by adopting land development regulations that establish height
limits consistent with the Airport Hazard Zoning Regulations.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• When not located within an airport • Businesses
zone of influence, as mapped in the • Retail
Land Development Code, this • Restaurants
category is also appropriate to
• Offices
designate areas for office, business,
commercial and industrial uses, with
a maximum height of 5 stories, and a
maximum floor area ratio of 4.0.
78
2025-910A
Future Land Use Categories
• Land development regulations shall
specify the type and distribution of
uses, design criteria, landscaping,
pedestrian and vehicular access.
Industrial (IND)
Description
Industrial land use is appropriate for areas appropriate for manufacturing, fabricating,
distribution, extraction, wholesaling, warehousing, recycling, and other ancillary uses.
Density and Intensity
Intensity will be controlled by adopting land development regulations that establish height
limits of 5 stories or less.with structures not to exceed 5 stories.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Land development regulations shall • Land development regulations shall
determine the appropriate scale of determine the allowable uses in the
uses and consider the externalities of Industrial land use category
such uses.
Education (E)
Description
Education (E) land use is appropriate for public and private schools and institutions of higher
learning. This category includes University of Florida (UF) properties designated in the UF
Campus Master Plan as part of the main campus.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Land development regulations shall • Land development regulations shall
address compatibility with determine the allowable uses in the
surrounding uses and infrastructure Education land use category
needs.
Recreation (REC)
Description
Recreation (REC) land use is appropriate for public and private leisure activities.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Land development regulations shall • Land development regulations shall
address the scale, intensity and determine the allowable uses in the
buffering of structures and outdoor Recreation land use category
improvements.
Conservation (CON) – up to 1 unit per acr e
Description
Conservation (CON) land use is appropriate for areas environmentally unsuited to urban
development, permanent buffers between land uses, areas used for passive recreation, and
nature parks.
Density and Intensity
79
2025-910A
Future Land Use Categories
Privately held properties within this category shall be allowed to develop at single-family
densities of 1 unit per 5 acres.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Land development regulations shall • Land development regulations shall
determine the appropriate scale of determine the allowable uses in the
activities, structures and Conservation land use category
infrastructure that will be allowed.
Agriculture (AGR)
Description
Agriculture (AGR) land use is appropriate for existing lands which are expected to continue in
agricultural production and ancillary uses..
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• Land development regulations shall • Land development regulations shall
allow single-family at densities no determine the allowable uses in the
greater than densities of 1 unit per 5 Agriculture land use category
acres.
• It is not expected that lands
designated for urban uses will be
converted to agricultural production
Public and Institutional Facilities (PF)
Description
Public and Institutional Facilities (PF) land use is appropriate for administrative, operational,
and utility governmental functions, private utilities, cemeteries, and public-private
partnerships or other legal arrangements where the land title is vested in a government and
the use(s) serves a public purpose.
Land Development Regulations Allowable Uses
• If the implementing zoning district is Land development regulations shall
PS, the PS zoning ordinance shall determine the allowable uses in the Public
address scale, intensity, and design and Institutional Facilities land use category
requirements.
Planned Use District (PUD )
Description
Planned Use District (PUD) land use is an overlay land use category that may be applied on
any specific property in the City. The land use regulations pertaining to this overlay district
shall be adopted by ordinance in conjunction with an amendment to the Future Land Use Map
of this Comprehensive Plan. PUD land use allows the consideration of unique, innovative or
narrowly construed land use proposals that because of the specificity of the land use
regulations can be found to be compatible with the character of the surrounding land uses
and environmental conditions of the subject land. This category allows a mix of residential
and nonresidential uses and/or unique design features which might otherwise not be allowed
in the underlying land use category.
80
2025-910A
Future Land Use Categories
Design Requirements Allowable Uses
• Each PUD overlay land use category • Allowable uses to be articulated by
adopted shall address density and the associated ordinance and the
intensity; permitted uses; access by implementing Planned Development
car, pedestrians, bicycle, and transit; zoning.
trip generation, trip distribution, and
trip capture; environmental features;
and, when necessary, buffering of
adjacent uses.
• Planned Development zoning shall be
required to implement a PUD land use
category.
Objective 1.2 – Urban iInfill and rRedevelopment will promote compact,
vibrant urbanism that supports transportation choice, improved quality of life,
and discourages sprawl.
Policy 1.2.1 Support flexibility to design requirements in the Land Development Code for infill
redevelopment while considering the character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
Policy 1.2.2 Encourage residential proximity and access to fresh food sources and health
services, and help establish urban agriculture through food markets and other
uses.
Policy 1.2.3 Discourage strip commercial uses and encourage a mix of residential and non-
residential uses.
Policy 1.2.4 Assess existing zoning, land use, overlay districts, and environmental
designations throughout the City to determine their ability to support the basic
needs of all residents in a community.
Policy 1.2.5 Create and encourage the development of well-defined squares and parks within
walking distance of residences, offices, and shops.
Policy 1.2.6 Nothing in this Plan shall limit or modify the rights of any person to complete any
development that has been issued a final development order prior to the
adoption of this Plan, from which development has commenced and is continuing
in good faith.
Objective 1.3 – Allowable Uses identified in the Land Development Code will
create an urban environment that is compatible and consistent with
surrounding areas while balancing economic growth and development.
81
2025-910A
Policy 1.3.1 Adopt land development regulations that provide protection for adjacent
residential areas and low intensity uses from the impacts of high intensity uses.
This shall be achieved by separating high-intensity intense uses from low-
intensity uses with transitional uses and by buffering of adjacent uses with
landscape, building type, and site design. Regulation of building type shall
ensure compatibility of building scale, and overall building appearance in
selected areas. Regulation of site design shall address orientation. Regulations
shall also include arrangement of functions within a site, such as parking,
loading, waste disposal, access points, outdoor uses and mechanical equipment;
and the preservation of site characteristics such as topography, natural features
and tree canopy.
Policy 1.3.2 Protect low-intensity uses from the negative impacts of high-intensity uses and
provide for the healthy coexistence and integration of various land uses
Policy 1.3.3 Continue to restrict auto sales and relatively intense auto service to North Main
Street north of NE 16th Avenue.
Policy 1.3.4 Eliminate uses inconsistent with the adopted Future Land Use Map
Policy 1.3.45 Eliminate or control uses that are found to be inconsistent with the Future Land
Use Plan. Land development regulations shall address the continued existence of
legal non-conforming uses, and amortization schedules for signs and street
graphics.
Policy 1.3.56 Continue to regulate legal, nonconforming uses. No legal, nonconforming use at
the time this plan is adopted or amended shall be rendered illegal by this plan,
except as provided in the land development regulations.
Policy 1.3.67 Encourage the development of mixed-use projects in locations where such
patterns are compatible with surrounding uses, supported by adequate
infrastructure, and consistent with the adopted Future Land Use Map and
applicable land development regulations.Encourage mixed-use development
where appropriate
Policy 1.3.78 Encourage the establishment of small-scale neighborhood retail uses, such as
corner stores, in appropriate locations near residential areas when consistent
with the Future Land Use Map, compatible with surrounding development, and
supported by adequate infrastructure. Encourage options to allow small-scale
retail “corner-stores” near residential development.
Objective 1.4 – Urban Design Standards will enhance the public realm and
create a vibrant environment that marks Gainesville’s unique sense of place.
Policy 1.4.1 Create a more interactive development pattern that has a strong relationship
between building facades and the public realm, the form and mass of buildings in
relation to one another, and the scale and types of streets and blocks.
82
2025-910A
Policy 1.4.2 EncourageEnsure land development regulations result in smaller block sizes,
frequent street connections, narrower streets, and promote access to
destinations in compact urban environments that alleviate the need for
automobile travel.
Policy 1.4.3 Require design standards that encourage shelter from the elements, including
but not limited to natural shading from trees and hardscape, canopies, and
awnings.
Policy 1.4.4 Continue maintenance of public spaces including but not limited to litter
cleanup, installation of trash cans and recycling bins, and routine landscaping.
Policy 1.4.5 Continue to regulate façade articulation, building orientation, building location,
automobile-oriented uses such as drive-through facilities and gas stations,
location and amount of parking, number of stories, outdoor lighting,
compatibility within context, and quality of materials for large retail and service
establishments in a manner that promotes civic pride, unique identity, and land
use objectives.
Policy 1.4.6 Continue to regulate subdivision of land, vehicle parking, and on-site traffic flow.
Policy 1.4.7 Continue to regulate signage through land development regulations.
Objective 1.5 – A Special Area is established for the Idylwild/Serenola area
that shall be subject to the policies and standards contained in this Section.
Policy 1.5.1 The intent of this Special Area is to establish specific guidelines for the area
identified as Idylwild/Serenola, generally bounded by Archer Road to the north,
SW 13th Street to the east, Paynes Prairie to the south and east, and SW 34th
Street and Interstate 75 to the west. Only a small portion of this area is currently
within city limits and subject to these standards. To help with identification of the
area and specific areas described herein, an Idylwild/Serenola Special Area Map
(Special Area Study: Idylwild/Serenola in the Future Land Use Element Map
Series), is incorporated by reference. Except where modified by the policies
herein, all policies of the Plan shall be applicable within the special area. Where
the specific policies conflict with general policies in the remainder of the plan, it
is the intent that the policies herein shall prevail.
Policy 1.5.2 To preserve and conserve significant natural resource areas, the following sub-
policies shall apply.
a. Preservation of significant natural communities listed species habitat,
geological features, and areas of strategic ecosystems shall be encouraged
through public or private acquisition where possible, and other appropriate
methods of preservation.
b. Appropriate conservation strategies shall be used to permit compatible
development when acquisition is not possible. These development
83
2025-910A
regulations are contained in the regulated natural and archeological
resources development portion of the Land Development Code .
Policy 1.5.3 To preserve, maintain, and restore where necessary, areas containing extensive
trees canopies, sub-policies (a) and (b) below shall apply. Tree canopy areas are
major existing areas containing a significant population of trees of a size and
condition to be considered a significant environmental resource.
a. The development regulations shall require a tree survey be submitted for all
development proposed within designated “Tree Canopy Areas”. The survey
shall be submitted at the time of development application.
b. Development within Tree Canopy Areas shall utilize “cluster” design concepts
where appropriate, concentrating development within given areas to
minimize the impact of the proposed development. The development
regulations shall provide for appropriate mitigation, if necessary.
Policy 1.5.4 To maintain developable or already developed lots in as much of a natural state
as possible, the following sub-policy shall apply in areas currently in residential
use. The areas currently in residential use contain the densely tree-canopied,
developed areas of the Idylwild, Serenola, and Malore Gardens neighborhoods.
a. Innovative lot designs shall be encouraged through flexibility in the
development regulations to maintain the natural character of the individual
lots currently in residential use.
Policy 1.5.5 To protect listed species through habitat maintenance and appropriate
development regulations, the following sub-policies shall apply.
a. The policies within the Conservation, Open Space and Groundwater Recharge
Element of the GainesvilleOur Environment Chapter of the Comprehensive
Plan shall apply as they relate to listed species.
b. “Listed species,” meaning those species of plants and animals listed by
federal or Florida law as endangered, threatened, or a species of special
concern; and those species ranked by the FNAI as S1, S2 and S3 plants, and S1
animals, S2 animals and only S3 animals that are breeding/nesting shall be
afforded the legal protective status provided by law.
c. The encroachment of development upon areas of listed species shall be
discouraged through regulations contained in the regulated natural and
archeological resources portion of the Land Development Code.
Policy 1.5.6 Individual sites and areas of archeological significance shall be preserved,
protected, or acquired, and wherever possible, enhanced. Sub-Ppolicies (a)
andthrough (b) below shall apply to archeologically significant areas.
a. The relocation of construction sites which coincide spatially with identified
historical and archeological sites shall be encouraged.
84
2025-910A
b. The development regulations shall establish minimum buffer areas around
known archeologically significant areas.
Policy 1.5.7 The City shall protect existing residential neighborhoods from encroachment of
incompatible land uses in the Idylwild/Serenola Special Area; promote
compatible land uses on adjacent properties; and encourage the type and
intensity of land uses that are consistent with and compatible to the natural
characteristics of the land.
Policy 1.5.8 The policies governing land use in the special area are as follows:
a. The 44 acres of the Idylwild/Serenola Special Area that were annexed by
Ordinance No. 991231, if developed, shall bep ermitted to be developed with
no more than 88 residential units, each of which must be single-family and
detached.
b. Residential properties located adjacent to single-family residential
neighborhoods should be developed at not higher than a 2 du/a increase in
density above the density permitted on any adjacent land within 150 feet.
Adjacent properties shall mean abutting properties or properties which are
separated only by a private or County right-of- way or easement, but
properties that are separated by an arterial street shall not be considered
adjacent. Further increases may be permitted only for development shown to
be sufficiently similar in character and intensity to existing uses so that
compatibility is maintained. Techniques such as step-up in residential
density, buffers, setbacks, screening, modest surface parking, and low-
intensity lighting between uses—based on performance standards to be
defined in the development regulations—may be utilized to provide such
compatibility. All density increases for any portion of the 44-acre property
annexed by Ordinance No. 991231 shall comply with Polic y4.9.8 a., which
limits the total number of units for the entire, 44-acre property to 88, each of
which must be single-family and detached.
c. The natural constraints of the land shall be considered considering any
proposed development.
d. Provide protection for environmentally significant areas. Specific criteria,
standards, and procedures should be identified for development requests
including provisions such as appropriate setbacks, buffers, mitigation and
restoration requirements and provision of natural open areas.
e. Provide for low density/intensity uses around environmentally significant
areas such as Paynes Prairie.
f. Provide through the development regulations in a manner to reevaluate
proposed development which has not developed after a designated period.
Policy 1.5.9 Provide the necessary infrastructure to sustain and support growth which
maintains and enhances the quality of life within the Idylwild/Serenola
neighborhood.
85
2025-910A
Policy 1.5.10 To provide for public water and centralized sewer system of adequate size and
capacity to protect the sensitive environmental structure of the area, sub-
policies (a) through (e) below shall apply.
a. Extend existing public water lines as appropriate to all approved new
development within the Idylwild/Serenola neighborhood, appropriately
looped to enhance flow. Such extensions shall be made in accordance with
GRU extension policies.
b. Extend centralized sanitary sewer facilities as appropriate to all approved
new development. Such extensions shall be made in accordance with GRU
extension policies.
c. Coordinate the extension of water and sewer facilities with the expansion of
the GRU treatment plant.
d. Require all new development to tie into the extended water and sewer lines
when capacity is available. Such connections shall be made in accordance
with GRU policies.
e. Prohibit new development within the neighborhood unless it is connected to
a public water supply and a centralized sewer facility unless:
1. the development is single-family in nature; and
2. is being constructed on a lot of 3 acres or more; and
3. receives the appropriate permits for either well use, on-site treatment, or
both.
86
2025-910A
Goal 2: All people in Gainesville live in healthy communities
that promote physical, mental, and social wellbeing.
All communities and neighborhoods in Gainesville should be designed to provide an enhanced
public realm that supports the wellbeing of neighbors. The design of buildings, roads, and
neighborhoods can have a positive impact on a person’s health which includes physical, mental,
and social well-being. Development plays an important role in supporting an environment that
is sensitive to these health needs and as such, communities in Gainesville should promote a
more walkable and safer built environment, provide opportunities for social interaction, and
create an environment that is mentally stimulating and aesthetically pleasing.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Average distance to a grocery store
• Walkability Score
• Results of the community resilience assessment
• Longevity of buildings and structures
• Number of building permits related to retrofitting existing buildings to improve
efficiency
• Number of LEED, Green Globes, or other green-certified buildings and projects
87
2025-910A
Objective 2.1 – Support resilient communities that can withstand adversity
from health, financial, and environmental stressors .
Policy 2.1.1 Encourage dense, compact development with transportation options that will
support the most efficient use of land., working to combat the challenges of
climate change
Policy 2.1.2 Prioritize areas with demonstrated needs when the City has planned citywide
public improvements such as sidewalks, street re-paving, underground utilities,
street lights, and public parks.
Policy 2.1.3 Promote the development of public green or open space in all City land use and
zoning districts to encourage outdoor recreation.
Policy 2.1.4 Continue to reduce or eliminate parking requirements in the City to reduce the
amount of impervious surfaces in development. Discourage the abundance of
large continuous impervious surfaces in large-scale developments.
Policy 2.1.5 Assess the resilience of communities and neighborhoods of Gainesville through
ongoinga community resilience assessments.
Policy 2.1.6 Ensure that new construction is built with materials intended to last for the long
term and are energy efficient. Buildings and structures shall be built-to-last and
resilient to extreme weather events and other community stressors .
Policy 2.1.7 Prioritize energy efficient retrofitting for existing buildings and the built
environment in areas within the City that have received less public investment,
are requiring attention, or are at significant risk.
Policy 2.1.8 Protect environmentally sensitive land, conserve natural resources, and maintain
open spaces identified in the Future Land Use Map Series through the
Development Review Process and land acquisition programs.
88
2025-910A
Goal 3: All people in Gainesville experience a safe urban
environment .
Through the urban design of public and shared spaces it is possible to give residents a sense of
ownership and therefore encourage investment and a desire to protect shared spaces and
enable territorial control of otherwise unsafe areas. Constructing the built environment in a way
that maximizes the ability for a neighbor to casually observe semi-public spaces can achieve a
greater level of community oversight and safety and reduce the occurrence of crimes of
opportunity. Thoughtfulness in the design of lighting, landscaping, sidewalks and streetscapes
can all work towards reducing crime and creating a sense of safety. Additionally, thoughtful
design into streetscapes and roadways can enable a safer multi-modal experience, reducing
conflicts between automobiles, pedestrians and bicyclists.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Percentage% of streets with sidewalks
• Number# of building code violations
• Number# of fires
• Percentage% overall feeling of safety
• Crime rates by neighborhood or census block, comparison over specified time periods
89
2025-910A
• Number of improvements to the public realm through written design standards and
physical additions
• Pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicle accident data on streets and especially at major
intersections
Objective 3.1 – Create and maintain safety standards to promote a built
environment where all neighbors feel safe and comfortable .
Policy 3.1.1 Create simple, physical interventions to support community safety, including
lighting improvements, safe crosswalks, signals, and signage.
Policy 3.1.2 Create visibility at the street level through front façade windows and doors,
which enhances safety and a sense of community.
Policy 3.1.3 Create lighting standards that promote personal safety and allow for visual
clarity.
Objective 3.2 – Increase pedestrian and bicyclist safety by reducing risk areas
in the public realm
Policy 3.2.1 Ensure that new development provides a safe pedestrian and bicyclist
facilities.experience
Policy 3.2.2 Create pedestrian spaces and sidewalks that are free of unnecessary
obstructions such as utility poles or other public utilities.
Policy 3.2.3 Improve underutilized roads to better serve pedestrians and bicyclists.
Policy 3.2.4 Create design standards that reduce conflict between automobiles and
pedestrians.
Policy 3.2.5 Implement traffic calming measures such as speed tables, curb extensions, and
raised pedestrian crossings, and mid-block pedestrian crossings where needed.
Policy 3.2.6 Design arterials, collectors, and intersections to reduce conflicts between road
uses by providing clear crossings, medians, and refuge islands.
Policy 3.2.7 Collaborate with the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT), Alachua
County, and the University of Florida to strengthen the safety of major
intersections and corridors including University Avenue and SW 13th Street, SW
34th Street and Archer Road, and SW 20th Avenue.
Policy 3.2.8 Pursue and dedicate funding for streetscape improvements including protected
bicycle lanes and dedicated multi-use trails.
90
2025-910A
Capital Improvements Section
Goal 4: All people in Gainesville experience adequate, fair,
accessible, and efficient public facilities .
The Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) is a short-range, five-year plan, that identifies capital
projects and equipment purchases, establishes a project planning schedule and identifies
options for financing the plan. The CIP is used to strategize community growth and development
by providing a plan for City infrastructure creation and maintenance based on community
needs. The CIP is a separate budgeting process within the development of the annual operating
budget, which establishes its own capital budget to be used on capital projects.
Capital Assets of the City include but are not limited to infrastructure, land, building, roads,
parks, rolling stock and equipment. A capital expenditure includes the acquisition of Capital
Assets; construction or expansion of facilities; major repairs costing more than $25,000 that
extend the useful life of the asset by more than 5 years or an individual item costing more than
$25,000 with a life expectancy of at least 5 years.
The Capital Improvements Section shall be considered a component of the City’s overall Capital
Improvements Program (CIP) in the annual budget appropriations and the 5-Year Capital
Improvement Plan (5-YR CIP) and items listed in the CIP and 5-YR CIP shall reflect the priorities
and needs set in the Capital Improvements Section.
91
2025-910A
In conjunction with the Five-Year Forecast, the CIP serves as the City's strategic framework for
planning, budgeting, and financing significant investments in infrastructure, facilities,
equipment, and other fixed assets. The development of the CIP is a vehicle for which to align
these major, long-term initiatives with the City's overarching strategic direction and that
financial resources are allocated in a fiscally responsible manner.
Objective 4.1 – Ensure the 5-year Schedule of Capital Improvements is
maintained as a clear, consistent, and fiscally responsible program for
delivering public facilities needed to meet adopted Level of Service standards.
Establish the following guidelines for the 5 -Year Schedule of Capital
Improvements
Policy 4.1.1 In its annual budget process, use the 5-year Schedule of Capital Improvements to
set funding levels for the provision, renewal or replacement of public facilities
necessary to meet and maintain adopted Level of Service (LOS) standards for
existing and future populations.
Policy 4.1.2 Schedule and fund City capital projects shown in the 5-year Schedule of Capital
Improvements included in this section.
Policy 4.1.3 Review and update the Capital Improvements Section and 5-year Schedule of
Capital Improvements annually during the regular budget planning and adoption
process.
Policy 4.1.4 Replace or renew capital facilities required to maintain adopted LOS standards
when deemed necessary by prudent engineering and utility practices. These
improvements shall be included in the 5-year Schedule of Capital Improvements.
Policy 4.1.5 Evaluate all annexation proposals to determine its ability to provide facilities at
adopted LOS standards for the residents in the area(s) to be annexed.
Policy 4.1.6 The Capital Improvements Section shall only include facility expenditure
information for the facility types with adopted LOS standards (Transportation,
Potable Water, Water Supply, Wastewater, Recreation, Public Schools Facilities
and Stormwater Management). Existing and projected facility needs identified in
those sections are included in this section. Other capital expenditures are listed
in the biennial budget and the City’s 5-Year Capital Improvement Plan.
Objective 4.2 – Establish the following guidelines for General Government
Capital Improvements .
Policy 4.2.1 The City shall continue annually including capital projects and capital equipment
as part of its adopted budget.
Policy 4.2.2 The Potable Water and Wastewater sections of the City’s Capital Improvements
Section shall be considered a subset of GRU’s capital budget and 6-Year Capital
92
2025-910A
Improvements Plan (6-YR CIP), and the capital budget and 6-YR CIP shall reflect
the priorities and needs set in the Capital Improvements Section.
Policy 4.2.3 The City shall continue to schedule General Government Capital Improvements
necessary to meet and maintain the LOS standards adopted in this Plan. The
schedule shall give priority to correcting existing deficiencies and replacement of
worn-out or obsolete facilities prior to the extension of new facilities.
Policy 4.2.4 The capital improvement must be within the financial capability of the City
(either through debt capacity or ability to fund the improvement outright). The
operating costs associated with it shall be identified and should not exceed the
City’s ability to annually fund those costs.
Policy 4.2.5 The City shall consider the plans of state agencies and water management
districts in evaluating capital improvements projects.
Policy 4.2.6 The City shall continue to use the Stormwater Management Utility funds allocated
for capital improvements to pay for the Stormwater Projects needed to maintain
LOS standards. These projects shall be shown in the 5-Year Schedule of Capital
Improvements.
Policy 4.2.7 Prioritization of General Government Capital Improvements shall be evaluated as
follows:
a. First priority shall be given to correcting existing facility deficiencies in
adopted LOS standards, elimination of public hazards and meeting regulatory
requirements or Federal and/or State mandates. First priority shall also be
given to capital improvements that are fully funded by development and that
will not cause operating cost deficits for the City.
b. Second priority shall be given to replacement of obsolete or worn-out
facilities that are projected to cause facility deficiencies in LOS prior to
expanding other facilities.
c. Third priority shall be given to adding or expanding facilities to serve vested
developments.
d. Fourth priority shall be given to adding or expanding facilities to serve
development needs in designated redevelopment areas that increase the use
of existing facilities and promote infill development.
e. Fifth priority shall be given to adding or expanding facilities for new
development in currently unserved areas. Expansions of facilities to unserved
areas shall be based on projected growth patterns found in the Future Land
Use Section.
Objective 4.3 – Establish the following guidelines for Gainesville Regional
Utilities (GRU) Capital Improvements .
Policy 4.3.1 The City, through GRU, shall continue to schedule and fund water/wastewater
capital improvements necessary to meet the standards adopted in this Plan. The
93
2025-910A
schedule shall give priority to correcting existing deficiencies and replacing worn
out or obsolete facilities prior to the extension of new facilities.
Policy 4.3.2 The capital improvement must be within the financial capability of GRU (either
through debt capacity or ability to fund the improvement outright) and the
operating costs associated with it shall be identified and shall not exceed GRU’s
ability to annually fund those costs.
Policy 4.3.3 GRU shall consider the plans of state agencies and water management districts in
evaluating capital improvements projects.
Policy 4.3.4 Prioritization of GRU Capital Improvements shall be evaluated as follows:
a. First priority shall be given to projects that correct existing facility
deficiencies in adopted LOS standards, eliminate or mitigate public hazards,
meet regulatory requirements or Federal and/or State mandates, or promote
the reuse and conservation of resources.
b. Second priority shall be given to projects to correct projected deficiencies in
adopted LOS standards or projects to accommodate new development and
redevelopment needs.
Objective 4.4 – Utilize the following Debt Management policies to manage debt
in such a way that General Government revenues available to fund on -going
operating expenditures are maximized.
Policy 4.4.1 The City may issue debt for capital improvement projects, major renovations to
existing capital improvements, land acquisition, refunding when fiscally and
strategically justified, and generating a net economic benefit for the City.
Policy 4.4.2 The City may align debt terms with asset lifespans and limit capitalized interest
to three years.
Policy 4.4.3 The City will structure debt repayment to be level and repay at least 50% of
principal within 10 years.
Policy 4.4.4 The City will maintain separate debt service funds and establish reserves when
required or financially beneficial.
Policy 4.4.5 The City will include 10-year call features on bonds unless a different structure
clearly benefits the City.
Policy 4.4.6 The City will, whenever possible, maintain a mix of fixed and variable-rate debt
with a target of 20–30% variable.
Policy 4.4.7 The City may use derivatives only when risks are understood and benefits clearly
outweigh costs.
Policy 4.4.8 Keep debt within policy limits based on property value, per capita measures, and
General Fund capacity.
94
2025-910A
Policy 4.4.9 The City must use derivatives only when risks are understood and benefits clearly
outweigh costs.
Policy 4.4.10 Strive for an “A” credit rating or higher and use enhancements only when cost-
effective.
Policy 4.4.11 Refinance debt when savings exceed 3% or when doing so improves legal or
operational terms.
Policy 4.4.12 Choose the most cost-effective issuance method based on market conditions and
transaction complexity.
Policy 4.4.13 Retain qualified advisors and legal counsel through competitive selection for all
debt transactions.
Policy 4.4.14 Invest proceeds in compliance with tax law and City investment policies to avoid
arbitrage violations.
Policy 4.4.15 Support Industrial Development Revenue Bonds (IDRBs) only when projects
deliver public benefit and meet strict financial safeguards.
Policy 4.4.16 Assign oversight to the Finance Director, with all policy changes requiring
Commission approval.
95
2025-910A
Goal 5: All people in Gainesville experience efficient roadway
systems based on Level of Service (LOS) Standards .
Objective 5.1 – Establish the following general Level of Service (LOS)
Standards .
Policy 5.1.1 The City shall continue to ensure the provision of services and facilities needed to
meet and maintain the LOS standards adopted in this Plan.
Policy 5.1.2 The 5-Year Schedule of Capital Improvements shall identify projects necessary to
ensure that any adopted LOS standards are achieved and maintained for the 5-
year period. The projects shall be identified as either funded or unfunded and
given a level of priority for funding.
Policy 5.1.3 The City shall adopt the following LOS standards for public facilities as specified
in their respective Chapters.
Policy 5.1.4 The LOS adopted for Transportation Mobility is solely for planning purposes and
not for the purpose of applying transportation concurrency. Transportation
Mobility LOS is excluded from the Concurrency Management System, and final
development orders are not conditioned on transportation concurrency. The
96
2025-910A
foregoing provisions shall apply to all references to Transportation Mobility LOS
in the Comprehensive Plan.
Policy 5.1.5 The City shall continue to use the Concurrency Management System to issue final
development orders conditioned on the following:
a. The availability of existing public facilities associated with the adopted LOS
standards; and
b. The funding, based on existing or projected funding sources, of public
facilities listed in the City’s 5-Year Schedule of Capital Improvements or the
Alachua County School District’s “5-Year District Facilities Work Program”
that are needed to maintain adopted LOS standards.
Policy 5.1.6 If the projected revenues to support capital improvements become unavailable,
the City shall amend the relevant LOS standards in the Comprehensive Plan or
prohibit any development that would lower the adopted LOS standards that are
included in the Concurrency Management System.
Policy 5.1.7 The City shall continue operation of its Concurrency Management System. The
Concurrency Management System is used to determine whether adequate
facilities exist, when the impacts of development are expected to occur, to
maintain adopted LOS standards set in the Comprehensive Plan. The latest point
in the application process for the determination of concurrency is prior to the
approval of an application for a development order or permit which contains a
specific plan for development, including the densities and intensities of
development
Policy 5.1.8 The concurrency requirements for potable water, solid waste, stormwater
management, water supply, recreation, and wastewater shall be met by any one
of the following standards:
a. The necessary facilities and services are in place at the time a final
development order is issued;
b. A final development order is issued subject to the condition that the
necessary facilities and services will be in place and available to serve the
development no later than the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its
functional equivalent;
c. The necessary facilities are under construction and bonded for completion at
the time a final development order is issued; or
d. The necessary facilities and services are guaranteed in an enforceable
development agreement that is secured by a completion bond, letter of
credit, or other acceptable form of security, subject to review and approval
as to form and legality by the City Attorney. The agreement must guarantee
that the necessary facilities and services will be in place and available to
serve the development no later than the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or its functional equivalent.
97
2025-910A
e. Prior to approval of a building permit or its functional equivalent, the City
shall consult with Gainesville Regional Utilities to determine whether
adequate water supplies to serve the new development will be available no
later than the anticipated date of issuance by the City of a certificate of
occupancy or its functional equivalent
Policy 5.1.9 The concurrency requirements for public school facilities shall be met if:
a. Adequate school facilities (elementary, middle, and high school) are in place
or will be under actual construction within 3 years after the issuance of a final
development order or its functional equivalent;
b. Adequate school facilities are available in an adjacent School Concurrency
Service Area (SCSA) or will be in place or under actual construction in an
adjacent SCSA within 3 years after the issuance of a final development order
or its functional equivalent; or
c. The developer executes a legally binding commitment to provide mitigation
proportionate to the demand for public school facilities to be created by
actual development of the property, including, but not limited to, the options
described in Subsection 163.3180(6)(h)2.a., F.S.
Policy 5.1.10 Notwithstanding a failure to satisfy school concurrency, a development may
proceed if all the following factors are shown to exist:
a. The proposed development is consistent with the future land use designation
for the specific property;
b. The proposed development includes a plan that demonstrates that the
capital facilities needed as a result of the proposed development can be
reasonably provided; and
c. The landowner contributes a proportionate share of the cost of providing the
school facilities necessary to serve the proposed development.
Policy 5.1.11 The City incorporates by reference the Alachua County School District’s "5-Year
District Facilities Work Program" as updated annually by October 1 of each year
per the requirements of Florida Statutes.
Objective 5.2 – Establish the following Level of Service (LOS) Standards for
New Development.
Policy 5.2.1 The City shall continue to require future development to pay for its capital
improvements that are required to maintain adopted LOS standards.
Policy 5.2.2 Development shall pay the full cost of stormwater management facilities
required by it to maintain the stormwater LOS standards set in the
Comprehensive Plan.
Policy 5.2.3 The City shall continue the adopted Land Development Regulations that establish
stormwater quantity and quality standards for the development of existing sites
98
2025-910A
with substandard on-site stormwater facilities. Such development shall pay the
proportional cost of meeting those standards that it requires.
Policy 5.2.4 The City shall continue its policy of having all new water and wastewater service
connections pay the fully allocated cost of the treatment facilities required to
serve them in the form of plant connection fees, and the cost of distribution or
collection facilities unless the service is on a developer installed system.
Policy 5.2.5 The City shall continue its policy of having development contribute the water and
wastewater distribution and collection system internal to a development.
Contributions in aid of construction must be paid if the City does not project an
adequate return on investment for water distribution or wastewater collection
system extensions.
Policy 5.2.6 The City shall continue its policy of having development provide all road
improvements within subdivisions as per the City’s subdivision regulations.
Objective 5.3 – Establish the following Level of Service (LOS) Standards for
Vested Developments .
Policy 5.3.1 Vested developments shall be defined as developments that have been issued
final development orders that have not expired under the regulations of the City’s
Code of Ordinances, were issued prior to adoption of the City of Gainesville 199-1
2001 Comprehensive Plan, and such developments have commenced and are
continuing in good faith.
Policy 5.3.2 The facilities necessary to maintain the adopted LOS standards required to serve
vested developments shall be available when the impacts of development occur.
Policy 5.3.3 The City shall continue its tracking of the number of developments with vested
development rights that must be served by public facilities at adopted LOS
standards through the Concurrency Management System.
Policy 5.3.4 Vested developments must provide or pay for the capital improvements that they
were required to provide under the development regulations that existed when
they were permitted.
99
2025-910A
Property Rights Section
Goal 6: All property owners in Gainesville experience
constitutionally protected and judicially acknowledged
private property rights.
Objective 6.1 – The following private property rights shall be considered in
local decision -making.
Policy 6.1.1 The right of a property owner to physically possess and control the owner’s
interests in the property, including easements, leases, or mineral rights.
Policy 6.1.2 The right of a property owner to use, maintain, develop, and improve the owner’s
property for personal use or for the use of any other person, subject to state law
and local ordinances.
Policy 6.1.3 The right of the property owner to privacy and to exclude others from the
property to protect the owner’s possessions and property.
Policy 6.1.4 The right of a property owner to dispose of owner’s property through sale or gift .
100
2025-910A
101
How We Get Around
2025-910A
How We Get Around
Multimodal Transportation Mobility Section
Where we are and how we got here
Transportation is the backbone that supports many aspects of life in Gainesville, from everyday
tasks like running errands and visiting family to accessing jobs, schooling, health care, and
other destinations that are essential to individuals’ economic mobility and wellbeing. When
access to transportation is limited by cost or location of services, the process of going about
daily life becomes more challenging.
Today, your ability to get around in Gainesville is heavily dependent on where you live.S ome
neighbors don't have access to transit services, or buses may not come frequently enough to
meet their needs. Others may not have sidewalks in their neighborhood or bicycling facilities
that enable them to get around safely. These barriers make it challenging to get around,
especially for neighbors who cannot afford to own cars. These disparities are the result of
historic government actions, environmental factors, and market forces that shaped the city’s
land use over decades. First, major employment, health and education centers were
concentrated in areas close to the interstate at the western city limits, while in eastern
Gainesville, environmentally sensitive lands made it expensive to develop, making it difficult to
generate jobs and commercial centers. Second, the City’s land use development regulations
have favored low-density housing development (e.g. single-family homes) across the city,
creating a geographically spread-out city with long travel times between destinations, making it
more difficult – especially for those that do not own a car – to get around. Third, a decades-long
partnership with the University of Florida funded improved transit services in student-oriented
areas via student transportation fees, creating expectations for enhanced transit service
citywide.
The City has made many efforts and investments to eliminate barriers, to promote infill and
mixed-use development, and to promote multimodal transportation. However, disparities
persist between some denser neighborhoods, with employment centers, student-oriented
housing, and many ways to get around (e.g. frequent bus services, quality sidewalks and bike
lanes), and other neighborhoods, where neighbors must commute long distances and have
limited mobility options.
Progress to build on
In recent years, the City recognized the need to develop a balanced, and safe transportation
system and has strengthened partnerships with the University of Florida, the Florida
102
2025-910A
Department of Transportation, and Alachua County to develop and implement forward-thinking
solutions. To date, the City has implemented successful strategies, including: adding micro-
transit and micromobility services that help neighbors get to their destinations; dedicating an
annual funding source to construct bike lanes, shared use paths, and sidewalks; investing in
smart technology to operate the traffic signal system and enhance overall traffic safety; and
implementing land use strategies that allow for higher densities and mixed uses that encourage
neighbors to walk or bike, reducing the need for driving.
What’s at stake?
Making sure that all neighbors are served by a safe, reliable, and affordable transportation
system is critical in maintaining a high quality of life in Gainesville and enabling access to
economic opportunity for all neighbors. This way, everyone has a reliable, affordable commute
to jobs that support their families; can access basic goods such as groceries using public transit;
and can go out for walks safely, with sidewalks or trails protecting them from vehicles. The
entire city benefits from the improved quality of life that these transportation improvements
ensure. To this end, ImagineGNV will guide an accessible and safe transportation system that
prioritizes vulnerable road users and neighbors underserved by mobility options.
103
2025-910A
Multimodal Transportation Mobility
Section
Goal 1: All people in Gainesville will have access to reliable,
accessible, affordable, and safe transportation.
The City recognizes the financial burden of transportation on neighbors who lack a vehicle or
families who only own one vehicle and depend on transit to get around. The City will adapt its
transportation strategies so that all Gainesville neighbors rwillwill have suitable transportation
options to reach their destinations.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Average travel time to work/school by Transportation Analysis Zone
• Transportation costs by Transportation Analysis Zone
• New miles of sidewalk
104
2025-910A
• New miles of bike lanes
Objective 1.1 – Improve the reliability and accessibility of transit services by
designing a system that strikes a balance between addressing the needs of the
transit-dependent and the needs of those who choose to use public transit.
Policy 1.1.1 Make existing transit services more accessible and convenient by:
a. Identifying locations suitable for mobility hubs, which provide safe and
convenient interchange of transportation modes (e.g. biking, driving, and
taking the bus).
b. Creating infrastructure modifications, such as queue jumps, to improve
transit travel times.
c. Identifying locations for implementation of amenities that encourage use of
transit and enhance the user experience.
Policy 1.1.2 Continue to seek ways to provide fare-free transit for residents in need, including
those under the age of 18 and over the age of 65 .
Policy 1.1.3 Prioritize upgrading existing transit stops by installing facilities and amenities
such as lights, transit shelters, sidewalks, and easy -to-understand timetables
and route information in transit dependent areas and high ridership areas.
Additionally, equip new stops with similar amenities as appropriate.
Policy 1.1.4 Continue to provide and/or expand on-demand and first mile/last mile services
to close accessibility gaps in neighborhoods currently underserved by mobility
options and/or frequent bus services.
Policy 1.1.5 Equip each transit system bus to carry bicycles.
Policy 1.1.6 Design all new Park and Ride lots to accommodate bicycle parking and install
bicycle parking facilities at all appropriate transit stops and transfer points
within City limits.
Policy 1.1.7 Continue to serve major trip generators and attractors, such as the UF Campus,
existing transit hubs, and transit-supportive areas, with safe, pleasant and
convenient transit stops, while also providing for the transportation-
disadvantaged.
Policy 1.1.8 Increase transit ridership consistent with the goals of the Transit Development
Plan.
Policy 1.1.9 Explore alternative transit services in addition to fixed route buses, including but
not limited to Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) and on-demand service.
105
2025-910A
Objective 1.2 - Monitor, assess , and evaluate transportation experiences in
order to find opportunities for improvement.
Policy 1.2.1 Increase City outreach efforts to low-income communities and work to
incorporate community feedback into the implementation of citywide and
neighborhood transportation plans.
Policy 1.2.2 Adopt the following Level of Service (LOS) standards for roadways, to be used
solely for planning purposes and not used to apply transportation concurrency:
a. The LOS standard for all City and County arterial and collector roads within
city limits shall be LOS E. The LOS standard shall be for purposes of Traffic
Impact Analysis required for comprehensive plan amendments, campus
master plans, special area studies and site access studies for development
plan review.
b. The LOS standard on State Roads within city limits shall be LOS E, except for
I-75 which shall be a LOS D within city limits. The City recognizes the authority
of FDOT to establish LOS Standards for its roads. The City will cooperate with
FDOT on planning based on these standards, but does not make a financial
commitment to maintain standards on roadways that it does not control.
Policy 1.2.3 Adopt the following Level of Service (LOS) standards for transit, to be used solely
for planning purposes and not used to apply transportation concurrency:
a. Pursue fixed-route transit service within ¼ mile of 80% of all medium- and
high-density residential areas identified on the Future Land Use Map, and
within the RTS service area.
b. Pursue peak hour frequencies of 20 minutes or less within ¼ mile of all high-
density residential and UMU-1 and UMU-2 land use areas in city limits.
c. Pursue and maintain fixed-route transit service to transit supportive areas
with peak hour frequencies of 30 minutes or less.
d. Pursue operation of 80% fixed-route transit routes for at least 14 hours per
day.
Policy 1.2.4 Consider the implementation of areawide quality of service (QOS) standards, in
addition to LOS standards, to assess driver, pedestrian, bicyclist, and transit user
experience with transportation facilities.
Policy 1.2.5 Maintain and update, on an ongoing basis, inventories of public pedestrian and
bicycling facilities networks to identify gaps and other needed improvements and
utilize criteria-based prioritization to determine funding allocation for project
implementation.
106
2025-910A
Objective 1.3 – Promote multimodal transportation choice and
interconnectivity of modes by adopting policies that encourage an
interconnected street network and encourage redevelopment.
Policy 1.3.1 Encourage the provision and use of a balanced transportation system that
reduces dependency on single-occupant vehicles and reduces vehicle-miles
travelled.
Policy 1.3.2 Promote transportation choice and enhanced accessibility by coordinating
transportation investments with land use strategies that promote infill
development, short trips, and multimodal transportation use prioritizing the safe
movement of people and interconnectivity of modes. The adopted Mobility
Program will ensure the application of funding as needed to mitigate impacts of
land development and enhance overall safety and access to all transportation
modes.
Policy 1.3.3 In order to promote highly desirable development within city limits, the City may
enter into agreements with developers to provide all or part of the transportation
mobility needs that are required by policies within this Element.
Policy 1.3.4 Promote walking, transit use, and bicycling in new development and
redevelopment by establishing modest, human-scaled dimensions such as small
street blocks, pedestrian-scaled street and building design, ample sidewalks to
carry significant pedestrian traffic, and improved access to transit stops.
Policy 1.3.5 Evaluate public lands for shared use path connections that link various land use
destinations. Utility and stormwater management rights-of-way and easements
will also be evaluated for such connections.
Policy 1.3.6 Encourage adaptive re-use of rarely used or out-of-service rail spurs into bicycle,
transit, and pedestrian facilities.
Policy 1.3.7 Ensure that street modifications support land use, housing choice, and
transportation choice.
Policy 1.3.8 Enhance the multi-modal transportation system between downtown and the
University of Florida to improve connectivity and promote transportation choice
and livability.
Objective 1.4 – Eliminate existing transportation -related barriers for people
with disabilities.
Policy 1.4.1 Incrementally install curb ramps, sidewalks, raised crosswalks, and transit stop
improvements, in conjunction with other street modifications or in response to
specific problem locations.
Policy 1.4.2 Maintain a transit fleet that can serve people with disabilities.
107
2025-910A
Policy 1.4.3 Ensure car parking spaces for people with disabilities conform to the Florida
Accessibility Code for Building Construction standards.
108
2025-910A
Transportation Choice
G)o al 2: All people in Gainesville will have a variety of
transportation mode choices and live in neighborhoods with
quality pedestrian and bike infrastructure that provides
multiple options to access daily needs.
Many neighborhoods in the city do not have sidewalks or bike facilities, which makes it difficult
to get around without driving. The City will close these network gaps, expand the use of context-
sensitive bicycle facilities, and implement speed reduction and mode integration strategies so
that neighbors of all ability levels will be able to complete trips safely by a variety of
transportation modes. Providing neighbors with alternatives to driving supports their health,
reduces emissions, and benefits the environment
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Availability of and proximity to connected sidewalks, low-speed streets, bicycle facilities
and trail networks
• A multimodal transportation index based on best practices
• Number of bicycle and pedestrian trips
• Carbon emission reduction
109
2025-910A
Objective 2.1 – Implement complete streets and multimodal infrastructure to
promote transportation choice, enhance access to major destinations and
reduce congestion.
Policy 2.1.1 Use “Complete Streets” principles to ensure that all roadways are planned,
designed, and maintained for safe use by users of all ages and abilities, including
people walking, bicycling, riding transit, driving vehicles, and moving freight.
Policy 2.1.2 Use “Context Sensitive Street Design” principles to design transportation
facilities for the desired speed of travel that consider the total context within
which a transportation project will exist and develop transportation projects that
fit the physical setting and preserve scenic, aesthetic, historic and environmental
resources while maintaining safety and mobility for all users.
Policy 2.1.3 Develop and expand a shared use path network that provides transportation
opportunities for people walking and bicycling.
Policy 2.1.4 Continue to prioritize funding for walking/bicycling-related investments in
accordance with the Mobility Plan and in support of transit trips, especially in
low-income communities.
Policy 2.1.5 Encourage bicycling and other micromobility modes across the city by continuing
to install bike-related infrastructure that creates a safer and more comfortable
environment for bicyclists of all ability levels and minimizes conflicts with motor
vehicles. Actions would include, among others:
a. Extending dedicated bike facilities that ensure riders are safe from cars and
support riders of all ability levels
b. Expanding implementation of bicycle detection at traffic signals
c. Expanding bicycle parking
Policy 2.1.6 Reduce carbon emissions generated by transportation by:
a. Investing in infrastructure (e.g. sidewalks, bike lanes) that is safe and
accessible to users of all ability levels
b. Transitioning the city’s transit fleet to low- or no-emissions vehicles based on
data and operation need
Policy 2.1.7 Make traffic signalization context-sensitive in areas with high levels of walking
and bicycling. This may include but is not limited to the adjustment of signal
timing and the installation of, or encouragement of the installation of, bicycle
detection devices on arterial and collector streets, consistent with FDOT
standards, in cooperation with Alachua County and FDOT.
Policy 2.1.8 Identify streets that should be made more walkable. Raised medians, wider
sidewalks, and on-street parking should be used, where feasible, on these
110
2025-910A
selected streets within, or adjacent to, the urban area and particularly within
multimodal supportive areas, such as downtown, UF, and other mixed-use areas.
Policy 2.1.9 Affirm and enforce 4 vehicular lanes as the maximum number of travel lanes for
new or widened transportation corridors within City limits, except for I-75.
Policy 2.1.10 Strive to ensure that the installation of a turn lane, where a bike lane is present,
will retain or include a continuous bike lane on the curb lane through the
intersection, in cooperation with Alachua County and FDOT and consistent with
FDOT design standards for road facilities.
Objective 2.2 – Create an environment that promotes transportation choices,
compact development, and a livable city.
Policy 2.2.1 Coordinate the transportation network with the land uses shown on the Future
Land Use Map Series in order to encourage compact development patterns,
provide safe and convenient access for work, school, shopping, and service-
related trips, protect the cultural and environmental amenities of the City, and
protect the integrity of the Florida Strategic Intermodal System.
Policy 2.2.2 Ensure that Future Land Use Map designations promote multimodal
transportation objectives by designating transit-supportive densities in
appropriate locations to support transportation choice.
Policy 2.2.3 Strive to iIncrease the amount of land designated for multifamily development on
the Future Land Use Map in locations near existing transit hubs or transit-
supportive areas, where appropriate.
Policy 2.2.4 Use the Airport Master Plan as the future land use guide for development in and
around the airport.
Objective 2.3 - The City will coordinate effectively with partner agencies to
advance the planning and implementation of transportation projects.
Policy 2.3.1 Coordinate with the Metropolitan Transportation Planning Organization (MTPO),
Alachua County, the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT), the University
of Florida (UF), and other related state, regional and local agencies to implement
land use, transportation and parking policies that promote transportation choice
and advance city transportation policies.
Policy 2.3.2 Coordinate with FDOT and Alachua County to implement Access Management
regulations.
Policy 2.3.3 Coordinate with FDOT, MTPO, the Community Traffic Safety Team, and Alachua
County to improve transportation system management and enhance safety by the
continued expansion and upgrade of the Traffic Management System, including
traffic signal priority control for emergency vehicles and buses.
111
2025-910A
Policy 2.3.4 Coordinate with FDOT to reduce large truck traffic on streets that are not
designated truck routes, and direct such traffic to designated truck routes.
Improved signs and enforcement shall direct non-local or through trucks to the
designated truck route.
Policy 2.3.5 Coordinate with UF to ensure that the Campus Master Plan mitigates
transportation impacts, explores participation in the mobility fee system, and
explores options to address LOS standard and innovative alternatives such as
QOS standards. Further, coordinate with UF to ensure that the Campus Master
Plan is consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the City’s
Comprehensive Plan.
Policy 2.3.6 Coordinate with the Gainesville-Alachua County Regional Airport Authority on its
proposed airport expansions and other aviation projects with transportation
plans by FDOT and the MTPO .
Policy 2.3.7 Assist the MTPO in annually issuing a Multimodal Level of Service Report.
Policy 2.3.8 Collaborate with FDOT, MTPO, and Alachua County to identify future
transportation rights-of-way and provide for development regulations and
acquisition programs that will protect such corridors for their intended future
use. Such protection and long-range planning shall include multimodal facilities
for all modes of travel.
112
2025-910A
Vision Zero
Goal 3: Gainesville will have no traffic -related deaths or severe
injuries.
The Vision Zero philosophy asserts that traffic deaths and serious injuries are preventable and
unacceptable. In the Gainesville Vision Zero Action Plan, the cCity commits to eliminating traffic
deaths and serious injuries within the cCity by 2040. The Ccity will provide safe ways to get
around for all neighbors, prioritize people over cars, and address high risk areas in the city’s
road network that may cause fatalities and serious injuries or may be dangerous for the most
vulnerable road users (pedestrians, cyclists, seniors, etc .). Additionally, the cCity recognizes
the need to identify communities that are disproportionately experiencing traffic fatalities and
injuries, and to prioritize investments in these areas.
A new paradigm of prioritizing people over cars in the design of transportation infrastructure
requires considering the needs of all users. Examples of this include but are not limited to
closing gaps in the sidewalk or bicycle network, providing parallel parking to create a buffer
between pedestrians and moving vehicles, designing narrower streets to help reduce vehicle
speed, and adding protected bike lanes.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Crash rate by mode by 100,000 population
• Crash severity rates by 100,000 population
113
2025-910A
• Reduction in Ttraffic-related serious injury and deaths year over year
Objective 3.1 – Advance implementation of the Vision Zero Action Plan to
improve the safety of all users of the transportation system.
Policy 3.1.1 Advance the City’s Vision Zero Action Plan through dedicated funding sources
such as the Capital Improvement Plan.
Policy 3.1.2 Prioritize funding for transportation projects that advance the City’s Vision Zero
Action Plan. This will include:
a. Implement speed reduction measures and other approaches to eliminate
hazardous street conditions.
b. Prioritize people over cars in the design and implementation of transportation
projects.
Policy 3.1.3 Incorporate Vision Zero considerations into the development review process. To
ensure Vision Zero is implemented across the city, the cCity will update the
review criteria within the development review process to include best practices
from Vision Zero.
Policy 3.1.4 Identify populations and neighborhoods that experience a disproportionate share
of traffic fatalities and injuries, and establish a data-driven system for tracking
these incidents. Use these findings to prioritize safety improvements in the areas
most affected. Identify communities that are disproportionately affected by
traffic fatalities and injuries. The City will create a system to track data on
fatalities and injuries and focus safety improvements in areas that are being
disproportionately impacted.
Objective 3.2 - Incorporate Vision Zero elements in infrastructure projects,
including but not limited to roadway resurfacing, the installation of new or
improved crossings, bike facilities, sidewalks and lighting enhancements.
Policy 3.2.1 Use traffic calming, where appropriate, to promote safety, transportation choice,
reduce the negative impacts of car travel, alter driver behavior, and improve
conditions for non-motorized street users.
Policy 3.2.2 Use street resurfacing projects as an opportunity to install or enhance sidewalks,
bicycle lanes, raised medians, and brick or brick -imprinted, paver, or painted
crosswalks, where feasible.
Policy 3.2.3 Review turn lanes on a case-by-case basis to ensure that intersections are safe
for all modes of travel.
Policy 3.2.4 Consider Explore alternative solutions to addressing car congestion, including
but not limited to intersection modification, signal timing, roundabouts, and
114
2025-910A
strategies that promote transit use, bicycling and walking. Widening a street
shall not be used as a first response strategy.
Policy 3.2.5 Ensure that new streets are designed for transportation choice by setting design
standards that call for minimal street widths, modest turning radii, modest
design speeds, curb extensions, traffic calming, gridded and connected patterns,
sidewalks, bicycle facilities, and prohibition of cul-de-sacs, where feasible.
Street design standards shall include consideration of usage by transit vehicles
Policy 3.2.6 Ensure that new streets are designed to promote transportation choice and
safety of all users.
Policy 3.2.7 Establish, as feasible and appropriate, mid-block refuge areas and marked
crossings at street mid-points, particularly for streets with continuous left-turn
lanes.
115
2025-910A
Transportation Mobility Program
Goal 4: Gainesville will facilitate a built environment that
promotes mobility choice through the regulation of
development. Further, Gainesville will establish a
Transportation Mobility Program to i mplement an alternative
transportation system that encourages compact, mixed -use,
and interconnected development , served by a multimodal
transportation system funded through multiple sources ,
including mobility fees .
As the cCity grows, new and existing housing, retail, and office developments increase the
demand on streets, sidewalks, and transit. In order to address the demand on the cCity’s
facilities due to new development or redevelopment, thec City will ensure new development
projects contribute to the improvement of thec City’s transportation facilities while minimizing
the overall cost burden to the public. The cCity will do this through the regulation of new
development, and through the implementation of the Transportation Mobility Program via the
Mobility Plan and Mobility Fee .
116
2025-910A
The Gainesville Mobility Plan, first adopted in 2025 and operating on a 20-year time horizon,
establishes a framework for moving people and providing transportation choice through various
mobility projects. The mobility projects included in the Mobility Plan are established to meet the
needs of projected population growth and employment. These projects form the basis for the
City of Gainesville Mobility Fee, a one-time fee assessed upon new development, intended to
mitigate the travel demand impact of that new development on the City’s multimodal
transportation system. Mobility fees are deposited into special revenue funds based on the
location of new development. Fee revenue is exclusively used for transportation infrastructure
and improvements within the area of the new development.
Objective 4.1 – Develop, implement, administer, maintain, and periodically
update the citywide Mobility Plan and Mobility Fee, collectively to be known as
the Gainesville Mobility Program, to plan, design, fund, and construct mobility
projects to enhance the multimodal transport ation system.
Policy 4.1.1 The city shall establish the Gainesville Mobility Program, as a replacement of the
Gainesville Transportation Mobility Program Area (TMPA) and traffic mitigation
payments, through development of an alternative transportation system
consisting of a mobility fee paid by new development and redevelopment based
on mobility projects, needed to accommodate projected growth in travel
demand, established in the city’s Mobility Plan.
Policy 4.1.2 The Mobility Plan shall include mobility projects that address the need for new
streets, intersection signals and turn lanes, safety upgrades, roundabouts, wider
roads for people driving, transit facilities and services identified in the transit
development plan for people riding transit, sidewalks, bike lanes, and shared-use
paths, along with safety and visibility enhancements for people walking and
bicycling.
Policy 4.1.3 The Mobility Plan shall (1) serve as the basis for identifying mobility projects for
inclusion in the Long Range Transportation Plan and various plans and programs
developed and updated by Alachua County, FDOT, the MTPO, UF, other local
governments, mobili ty partners, and private development, and (2) advance
mobility projects as part of road resurfacing, reconstruction, rehabilitation, new
streets, upgraded streets, or widened roads.
Policy 4.1.4 The mobility projects in the Mobility Plan should address the projected travel
demand impacts from new development and redevelopment and should address
impacts to City, Alachua County, and State Roads.
Policy 4.1.5 The Mobility Plan shall identif y mobility projects to be prioritized through the
annual capital improvements plan update and will serve as the 10 -year and 20-
year Capital Improvements Element program for the City’s multimodal
transportation system.
Policy 4.1.6 The City shall utilize the Mobility Plan to coordinate mobility projects withA lachua
County to address potential impacts from future annexations.
117
2025-910A
Policy 4.1.7 The City will pursue multiple sources of funding such as mobility fees, gas and sales
tax, assessments and property tax, grants, loans, and partnerships for mobility
projects identified in the Mobility Plan and for maintenance and operation of the
existing multimodal transportation system.
Policy 4.1.8 The mobility projects identified in the Mobility Plan shall serve as the basis for the
mobility fee. The mobility fee shall be a one-time assessment on new development
and redevelopment to mitigate its transportation impacts.
Policy 4.1.9 The Mobility Program will include four( 4) assessment areas, with expansion areas
included to address future annexation into the City, where mobility fee rates will
vary to reflect differences in travel and the need for mobility projects to
accommodate new development and redevelopment.
Policy 4.1.10 The mobility fee shall be periodically evaluated for updates and shall be updated
at least once every five years.
Policy 4.1.11 The mobility fee shall be expended on the mobility projects included in the Mobility
Plan and the Capital Improvements Program. The commission may expend mobility
fees by mode in a manner that is roughly equivalent to the overall cost of mobility
projects by mode relative to the overall cost of the Mobility Plan or elect to
establish a percentage of funds to be allocated by mode as part of the annual
Capital Improvements Program.
Policy 4.1.12 The collection and expenditure of the mobility fees shall be reported to the State
as required by Florida Statute and shall be consistent with applicable legal and
statutory requirements.
Policy 4.1.13 The City will continue to recognize all valid existing Transportation Mobility
Program Area (TMPA) agreements. Amendments to TMPA agreements that result
in additional unmitigated transportation impacts or expiration of a TMPA
agreement will require the new development or redevelopment to address the
requirements of the Mobility Program.
Policy 4.1.14 All new development and redevelopment, without a TMPA agreement, located in
the city shall mitigate its off -site external traffic impact through payment of the
mobility fee and its on -site site-related impacts through mobility solutions and
criteria established in the Land Development Code.
Policy 4.1.15 The Mobility Program ordinance may shall establish de-minimis criteria whereby
new development or redevelopment would be exempt from payment of a mobility
fee to mitigate off-site impacts. The City Commission may also elect to identify
areas of the city, affordable housing, or certain types of ec onomic development,
in the Mobility Program ordinance, that would be excluded from the requirement
to pay a mobility fee to mitigate off-site impacts.
Policy 4.1.16 The City shall establish criteria and exemptions in the land development code to
address site-related transportation modifications that are required for operational
or safety reasons, such as, but not limited to, turn lanes, access connections, or
traffic control devices, to ensure site related access does not impeded mobility of
118
2025-910A
the multimodal transportation system.
Policy 4.1.17 The City shall establish mobility solution and site accessibility criteria in the Land
Development Code. The solutions and criteria shall be proportional to the impact
of the development, reflect surrounding land development patterns, and facilitate
walking, bicycling, transit access, and motor vehicle access.
Objective 4.2 – Promote walkability, interconnectivity and mobility choice in
development and redevelopment.
Policy 4.2.1 Require new development and redevelopment to provide pedestrian and bicycle
access to nearby shared use paths, where feasible, or to enable a future retrofit
connection.
Policy 4.2.2 Require development and redevelopment projects to provide cross-access to
adjacent properties for people driving, walking and bicycling. Connectivity or
stub-outs to property boundaries for future connections shall be included in
development and redevelopment plans. When feasible, mobility fee credits may
be provided for the construction of off-site connectivity enhancements.
Policy 4.2.3 Require the street layout of new developments to be coordinated with the streets
and parking of surrounding areas. This shall be done by establishing street
connections to adjacent or potentially adjacent streets and parking lots, when
feasible, unless natural features prevent such a connection. When not feasible,
the end of the street shall establish a right-of-way connection to adjacent, offsite
property so that a future motorized or non-motorized connection to an adjacent
street or property is not foreclosed.
Policy 4.2.4 Require development plans for new developments and redevelopment of
residential and non-residential sites to illustrate existing multimodal access
connections to adjacent properties and provide or upgrade, as needed, safe and
convenient multimodal access connections for people walking and bicycling to
access adjacent properties and transit service.
Policy 4.2.5 Require new development projects to fund and/or construct transportation
improvements including pedestrian and bike infrastructure, such as sidewalks
and bike lanes or paths.
Policy 4.2.6 Encourage new public and private schools to provide bicycle and pedestrian
connections to nearby residentially designated lands.
Policy 4.2.7 Require new development and redevelopment to provide safe and convenient on-
site pedestrian circulation with features such as, but not limited to, sidewalks
and crosswalks that connect buildings, transit stops, and parking areas at the
development site.
Policy 4.2.8 Where bicycle parking is a required component of development, require bicycle
racks that provide durability, security, ease of use, attractiveness, adaptability to
119
2025-910A
different styles of bicycles and lock types, and minimal hazard to pedestrians.
Examples include bicycle lockers and the “inverted U” bicycle rack.
Policy 4.2.9 Encourage the installation of parking garages and shared parking lots within
neighborhood activity centers, employment centers and the area between
downtown and the UF campus.
Policy 4.2.910 Continue to process right-of-way vacations in alignment with the standards and
criteria established in the Land Development Code.
Policy 4.2.101 For any development or redevelopment within the city, the following is required,
unless exempted in the Land Development Code:
a. Sidewalk connections from the development to existing and planned public
sidewalk along the entire development frontage;
b. Cross-access connections/easements or joint driveways, where available and
economically feasible;
c. Deeding of land or conveyance of required easements along the property
frontage to the City, as needed, for the construction of public sidewalks, bus
turn-out facilities, and/or transit shelters. Such deeding or conveyance of
required easements, or a portion of same, shall not be required if it would
render the property unusable for development. A Transit Facility License
Agreement between the property owner and the City for the placement of a
bus shelter and related facilities on private property may be used in lieu of
deeding of land or conveyance of easements. The License Agreement term
shall be for a minimum of 10 years;
d. Closure of existing excessive, duplicative, or unsafe curb cuts or narrowing of
overly wide curb cuts at the development site, as defined in the Access
Management portion of the Land Development Code; and
e. Safe and convenient on-site pedestrian circulation, such as sidewalks and
crosswalks connecting buildings and parking areas at the development site.
Policy 4.2.112 When a mobility project identified in the Mobility Plan, such as a new street, a
widened road, or a multimodal facility for walking, bicycling, and transit
ridership, is located adjacent to or within a proposed new development or
redevelopment, the development shall provide right-of-way and construct the
mobility project along the limits of the development proportional to the impact
of the development as established in the Land Development Code.
Policy 4.2.123 The City’s Land Development Code shall provide standards for all new
developments and redevelopment within the mobility program area. Within the
transect zoning district areas, the Land Development code shall regulate urban
form to ensure a compact, pedestrian-friendly environment that supports multi-
modal opportunities.
120
2025-910A
Policy 4.2.14 Automobile-oriented developments/uses within the City, including drive-through
facilities, surface parking lots as a principal use, parking garages, car washes,
and gasoline service stations, shall be regulated by the Land Development Code.
121
2025-910A
122
Our Environment
2025-910A
Our Environment
Stormwater Management Section
Conservation Section
Potable Water & Wastewater Management Section
Solid Waste Section
Where we are and how we got here
Our environment plays a significant role in the health and vitality of our communities and is
inextricably connected to wellbeing, housing, health, food, and jobs. Our environment creates
conditions through which all Gainesville neighbors can live, work, and play and be safe from
environmental hazards. In light of increasing pressures due to climate change and statewide
population growth, now more than ever it is important to responsibly manage our resources and
infrastructure to ensure Gainesville’s communities can adapt and thrive.
Important environmental goals for the city are that all neighbors are provided with:
• Safe, reliable, affordable water, wastewater, stormwater, and energy infrastructure and
services
• Protection of critical infrastructure from flooding and other impacts of climate change
• Resilient infrastructure that will improve the ability to protect neighborhoods from
flooding and other climate change impacts
• Clean air, water, and land
• Access to recreation and natural areas
Today, who you are and where you live in Gainesville may determine how you experience the
environment. Many low-income residents live in older communities. Some of the environmental
challenges often facing older, lower income neighborhoods in Gainesville include, which
oftentimes experience environmental challenges such as:
• Stormwater drainage was constructed according to the standards of the time, but may
not meet current construction standards which can contribute to flooding in some areas
• Older water distribution and wastewater collection piping and other infrastructure that
needs to be upgraded to ensure Gainesville Regional Utilities (GRU) continues to provide
reliable service over the long term
• Access to parks & other natural areas
• Lack of private investment in East Gainesville and other lower income areas
123
2025-910A
• Older homes are often less energy efficient and vulnerable populations are less able to
invest in renovating homes to improve energy and water use efficiency
Stormwater flooding occurs in some areas of Gainesville, particularly in low lying areas that are
along creeks or wetlands. Many of these low-lying areas were developed before current
stormwater management rules were in place, which can contribute to flooding issues. More
than half of Gainesville’s inventory of FEMA-designated floodplains occurs inare located in areas
that are not low income. Through its stormwater utility, the City invests in maintaining
stormwater infrastructure and in making drainage improvements in critical areas where
feasible. Improvements can be limited by physical constraints such as land availability,
including narrow rights-of-way and natural constraints including creeks and wetlands. The City
continuously seeks to leverage city funds with state and federal grant programs to improve
drainage in flood-prone areas. To that end, the City has applied for several grants to fund
projects that work towards building resiliency from climate change and extreme weather events
within the storm infrastructure.
In Gainesville, as in other parts of the country, it is critical that the city continue to invest in
replacing aging infrastructure. In accordance with state and federal regulations and the
Comprehensive Plan, GRU must meet certain level of service standards for all of its water and
wastewater customers. These standards are in place to protect public health, safety, and the
environment and to ensure all of its customers are getting reliable and safe service. Older water
and wastewater infrastructure exists in many high-income and low-income areas. Water and
wastewater infrastructure tends to be durable and is expensive to replace. GRU continually
assesses its water and wastewater piping and other infrastructure and has long-term
investment programs to systematically replace and aging infrastructure to ensure reliable
service over the long term. GRU continually assesses, maintains, and replaces its energy
delivery infrastructure to ensure safe, reliable service to all customers.
General Government operates the ConnectFree program in collaboration with GRU which
connects existing homes to GRU water and wastewater services within the city. The program
pays the cost of connecting neighbors who want to be connected to GRU water and/or
wastewater where it is feasible to do so. The program is targeted to lower income residents and
also pays for the water and wastewater connection charges for connecting new affordable
housing projects. In conjunction with this program, GRU has also been implementing targeted
septic to sewer conversions in which existing homes with failing septic tanks can be connected
to GRU sanitary sewer. The program targets homes with failing septic tanks near creeks.
Lack of private investment in East Gainesville is a problem that the city has worked to address
for several years. Private investment benefits areas by renovating existing structures and adding
new structures that meet current codes, providing new public works and utility infrastructure,
providing critical products and services to residents, and fostering overall economic activity and
creating and sustaining jobs. GRU has continued to maintain and upgrade critical backbone
water, wastewater, and energy infrastructure to ensure adequate capacity is available when
development occurs in East Gainesville.
124
2025-910A
Older homes are often less energy efficient, and vulnerable populations are less able to invest in
renovating homes to improve energy and water use efficiency. Higher temperatures resulting
from climate change may lead to higher utility bills for populations with energy inefficient
housing. The GRU Low-income Energy Efficiency Program Plus (LEEP+) assists low-income
residents with making energy efficiency improvements to their homes to help them reduce their
utility bills and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The city also has energy efficiency
requirements for rental properties which help to reduce energy costs for renters.
In many areas of the country, industrial emissions of pollutants to the air and water can impact
residents. Historically, heavily industrialized areas are often located near lower income
neighborhoods. Historical lack of regulatory oversight can contribute to negative environmental
conditions in those areas. Negative environmental conditions compound with economic and
social conditions to cause higher levels of chronic health problems such as diabetes and asthma
among low-income communities. In Gainesville, historical operations at the Cabot/Koppers
Superfund site posed a threat to neighborhoods around the site due to historical air emissions
and soil contamination and threatened the community’s water supply. The City, GRU, Alachua
County, and neighbors engaged with US EPA, other regulators, and the parties responsible for
the site to ensure the site is cleaned up to minimize risk to the neighborhood and the
community’s water supply.
Looking ahead, climate change will continue to increase the risk of storms and flooding,
particularly in low-lying areas which further taxes aging infrastructure. Areas that are currently
prone to flooding will face increased impacts. There are many existing older subdivisions and
residential areas within the City that do not meet the current level of service standards. These
neighborhoods, with older, aging or even non-existent infrastructure, will be more susceptible
to outages and damage. Higher temperatures will exacerbate health impacts on people with
chronic conditions and lead to higher utility costs for residents without access to housing with
efficient cooling systems. As climate risks increase in frequency and severity, Gainesville will
likely experience an influx in residents as Florida’s coastal areas become less desirable.
Where and how climate solutions are prioritized in Gainesville has not historically incorporated
socio-economic factors. Many residents, particularly from Gainesville’s historically black
neighborhoods and lower-income communities, have felt left out of conversations and decisions
regarding Gainesville’s environment, including regulations and conservation programs. Citywide
regulations for environmental protection heavily impact East Gainesville which contains an
abundance of environmentally sensitive areas, including wetlands, floodplains, strategic
ecosystems that remain undeveloped, and forested areas containing large numbers of heritage
trees. In addition, East Gainesville neighborhoods tend to be older, with aging structures that
may not meet safety and energy efficiency standards required of new construction.
Progress to build on
125
2025-910A
The City and Alachua County recognize a need to continue to meet the community’s
infrastructure needs, address aging existing infrastructure that exacerbates existing disparities
in neighborhoods and combat the impacts of climate change both by reducing the City’s
emissions and by investing in climate and community resilience. The city will play a proactive
role in reducing greenhouse gas emissions to reduce our climate impacts while at the same time
maintaining utility system reliability and keeping utility rates affordable. Accomplishing both
affordability, reliability, and greenhouse gas reduction requires a well thought out strategic
approach. GRU will also seek out opportunities to improve service, reduce costs, and develop
new revenue streams that will help to offset GRU’s operating costs to help keep rates
affordable.
Climate change presents new challenges for everyone, and federal and state funding
mechanisms have been created to help local communities address these challenges and build
resilience. In July 2022, the City of Gainesville, in partnership with Gainesville Regional Utilities
(GRU), completed a comprehensive Vulnerability Assessment through the FloodWise
Communities program. This assessment evaluated critical infrastructures such as stormwater
systems, wastewater facilities, and affordable housing for their exposure and sensitivity to
current and projected climate-related hazards, including increased flooding and rising
groundwater levels. The process incorporated socioeconomic data to identify neighborhoods at
heightened risk, which helps provide a nuanced understanding of community vulnerabilities and
identify focus areas. Alachua County completed its Climate Vulnerability Assessment in 2024.
The City and GRU completed an Updated Vulnerability Assessment in 2025. The findings from
these assessments are instrumental in guiding the city's adaptation and mitigation planning
efforts, informing grant applications, budget proposals, and projects aimed at enhancing
Gainesville's resilience to extreme weather events and climate conditions.
The City and GRU also developed an Adaptation Plan in 2025 which builds on the Vulnerability
Assessment by compiling a list of projects needed to address critical assets identified as
vulnerable to flooding.
Projects to adapt the City’s critical assets identified were identified in the Adaptation Plan and
ranked based on score. The highest scoring projects were selected from the focus area. The
scoring of the projects included an equity component, which considered project location within
socially vulnerable communities. Costs for the projects were estimated. Projects will be
incorporated into the Alachua County Local Mitigation Strategy (LMS), which also includes
points for serving socially vulnerable communities.
GRU and the City have invested heavily throughout Gainesville to replace, upgrade, and improve
aging infrastructure to protect and improve surface water quality, stormwater drainage, and
service to neighbors. GRU will continue to invest in operations, maintenance, and infrastructure
upgrades to ensure all customers are provided with safe and reliable potable water,
wastewater, electric, and gas services and that the level of service standards are met. GRU’s
LEEP+ program helps low-income homeowners with making energy efficiency improvements to
their homes to reduce utility costs and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. As of 2025, the City is
committed to 100% renewable energy by 2045. The City continues to invest in maintaining
126
2025-910A
existing stormwater drainage infrastructure and in upgrading stormwater drainage, roads, and
other infrastructure throughout the city. Some examples of major projects that the City and GRU
have completed or are underway which benefit residents of East Gainesville and other
vulnerable areas include:
• Duval Stormwater Park (Credit Basin);
• Lake Forest Creek Watershed Management Plan;
• Depot Stormwater Park (Credit Basin);
• Springhill Stormwater Park (Credit Basin);
• Sweetwater Wetlands Park;
• Recent roadway improvements include SE 4th Street, NE 9th Avenue, and NE 10th
Avenue; and
• Main Street Water Reclamation Facility upgrade
Many other road, drainage, and utility projects have resulted in improved water quality and
enabled private development investment. Gainesville’s green infrastructure, particularly its
open space areas and tree canopy, is as integral as its grey infrastructure and recent efforts
include the development of the City’s first Urban Forest Management Plan. The 20-year plan was
created in collaboration with the University of Florida, local businesses, and residents and seeks
to address community needs such as providing shade, reducing heat islands, conserving energy,
creating equitable access to parks and greenways, improving air and water quality, reducing
greenhouse gas emissions, and expanding access to outreach and education efforts to target
neighborhoods based on need. The goals and objectives of the management plan are interwoven
throughout the City’s Land Development Code and heavily influence the character and
development of Gainesville.
The Zero Waste Plan, adopted by the City in partnership with Alachua County, aims to reduce
impacts of waste on the City’s environment with several strategiesi ncluding providing
household hazardous waste events in East Gainesville to make hazardous waste services more
accessible for residents. Zero Waste ordinances addressing wasted food diversion and the
recovery of construction and demolition debris are underway.
What’s at stake?
Ensuring that all Gainesville residents can enjoy their natural environment is critical to building
quality of life and wellbeing. The City developed ImagineGNV to help ensure we are managing
our environmental resources in a way that prioritizes neighborhoods that disproportionately
experience negative environmental impacts and are particularly vulnerable to extreme weather .
Stormwater Management Section
127
2025-910A
Goal 1: Gainesville’s stormwater infrastructure will be safe,
reliable, and affordable and meet environmental regulations.
The city will continue to invest in operating, maintaining, and upgrading stormwater
infrastructure in order to maintain reliability and protect against impacts of climate change
throughout its service area. The city will incorporate socio-economic factors in prioritizing
capital investment plans. By targeting infrastructure improvements and investments where the
need is greatest, we can ensure all Gainesville communities are ready to deal with the
environmental challenges of today and adapt to the effects of climate change. In addition,
programs targeted at Gainesville’s most vulnerable residents will help to overcome the cost
barrier to ensure their homes are safe and energy efficient .
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Completion of a 20-year Stormwater and Wastewater Needs Assessment per Section
403.9302, F.S. This assessment conducts an analysis of the expenditures necessary to
maintain, repair, replace, and expand stormwater and wastewater infrastructure. This
assessment, per statute, is to be completed every 5 years with the first assessment due
June 30, 2022.
• Projects completed throughout the City based on needs identified in the vulnerability
assessment and adaptation plan.
• Level of Service standards being met throughout the GRU service area.
• Percentage of households served by the sewer system
• Number of projects completed from the Adaptation Plan
• Miles of water and wastewater piping replaced or upgraded per year within the GRU
service area
Objective 1.1 – Provide for safe, reliable, and affordable stormwater
management
Policy 1.1.1 Develop a capital investment prioritization framework that considers social
vulnerability into decision-making processes to ensure the City allocates capital
funding based on disproportionate need and risk across all neighborhoods. This
includes:
a. The City prioritizesPrioritization of projects based on system needs to ensure
level of service standards are met for all customers and to minimize risk of
failure and minimize operating costs. The City also considers socioeconomic
factors in making decisions on project prioritization and location.
b. Completion of a flood vulnerability assessment and development of
adaptation plans and funding strategies to protect critical assets and
infrastructure from flooding. These plans will factor in social vulnerability in
prioritizing mitigation efforts.
128
2025-910A
c. Development of a decision support framework for stormwater maintenance
that considers the social vulnerability index.
d. Regularly collecting and updatingRegular collection and update of
Gainesville’s climate and hazard risk projections to support decision-making.
e. Development ofa process that requires that decisions are informed by the
framework and updated risk data.
Policy 1.1.2 Identify and prioritize existing and new sources of funding, such as grants, to
modernize infrastructure in areas with substandard infrastructure, high risk of
flooding, and/or with limited resources to address flooding and other climate
events. The City will leverage federal infrastructure funds and other sources to
modernize infrastructure in Gainesville communities that have experienced
disinvestment and flooding challenges and/or are vulnerable critical assets.
Policy 1.1.3 The City shall require stormwater quality treatment facilities for development
and redevelopment.
Policy 1.1.4 The city’s land development code shall include provisions to address impervious
parking surfaces, including removing minimum parking requirements and
reducing the maximum allowed parking where appropriate. The City’s land
development regulations shall include provisions to reduce the amount of
impervious parking surface allowed.
Policy 1.1.5 The City’s land development regulations code shall include provisions that meet
or exceed best management practices for stormwater management.
Policy 1.1.6 The City shall maintain guidelines for the design of stormwater basins that
require the use of native vegetation and basin slopes suitable for stormwater
treatment that promote highly diverse plant and animal habitats, particularly
within stream-to-sink basins, and that enhance the hydrological and ecological
functions of related wetland areas.
Objective 1.2 – Implement Level of Service (LOS) standards to diminish the
occurrence of new flooding and to protect or improve water quality.
Policy 1.2.1 The LOS standards for all stormwater management facilities shall be the 100-year
critical duration storm. The LOS standard for water quality treatment shall be
treatment of "first one (1) inch" of runoff and compliance with the stormwater
management facility design and performance standards established in the
statewide stormwater rule and applicable water management district to ensure
that the receiving water quality standards of Chapter 62-302 F.A.C. are met and
to ensure that receiving surface waters maintain their classifications as
established in Chapter 62-302 F.A.C. These standards shall apply to all new
development and redevelopment. Any exemptions, exceptions, or thresholds in
the Florida Administrative Code (F.A.C.) citations are not applicable.
129
2025-910A
Policy 1.2.2 The City shall continue to comply with the adopted Land Development
Regulations that establish and apply uniform design standards and procedures to
the development of water quantity and quality control facilities.
Policy 1.2.3 The City shall continue to comply with the adopted Land Development
Regulations that provide standards for the design of facilities in volume sensitive
drainage basins.
Objective 1.3 – Continue to comply with its stormwater management plan that
address existing deficiencies and identified needs.
Policy 1.3.1 Master stormwater basin plans shall be updated for each creek watershed. Such
plans shall address:
a. The potential for infill development within each basin;
b. Potential climate change impacts on rainfall and flooding;
c. The encroachment of existing developed areas in the 100-year floodplain;
d. Identify The identification of projects to improve resiliency to climate change;
e. Identify The identidication of potential sub-regional stormwater treatment
facilities;
f. Prioritize Prioritization of flood resiliency and water quality improvement
projects that promote restoring the natural drainage patterns of
watercourses and wetland areas.
Policy 1.3.2 The City will implement the projects recommended in the Adapation Plan .
Policy 1.3.3 A 5-Year Stormwater Implementation Plan will be developed and updated
annually. The plan will include capital projects and master plans.
Objective 1.4 – Ensure that proper and adequate stormwater management
facilities are provided to meet future needs.
Policy 1.4.1 The City shall continue to conduct assessments on an as needed basis, to
determine the performance of design standards and stormwater management
projects with regard to maintaining and/or reducing the elevation of the 10-year
flood channel and 100-year floodplain, especially where such elevations would
indicate inundation of existing developed areas. If the assessment indicates that
the flood potential has increased, new development shall be restricted until such
time as additional standards are implemented and/or stormwater management
improvements are provided to meet the impact of such development .
Policy 1.4.2 The City shall continue to inventory all city-maintained stormwater management
facilities, conveyance systems and structures.
Policy 1.4.3 The City shall continue to study existing deficiencies identified in the needs
assessment and vulnerability analysis and proposed capital improvements shall
be prioritized.
130
2025-910A
Policy 1.4.4 The City shall continue to coordinate with Alachua County and other
governmental entities to maintain the existing capacity and function of shared
watersheds and to design floodplain elevation standards at or below the 10-year
flood channel and 100-year floodplain as established by the most recent Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or a localized study that uses FEMA-approved analyses and that is
reviewed and approved by the City of Gainesville Public Works Department.
Policy 1.4.5 The City shall continue to comply with adopted stormwater quantity and quality
design standards for the redevelopment of existing sites that have substandard
or no on-site stormwater management facilities.
Policy 1.4.6 The City shall continue to review information required for site plan submittal for
completeness and revise these requirements to reflect current engineering
practice.
Policy 1.4.7 The City shall continue to comply with the procedure for amending the 10-year
flood-channel and 100-year floodplain elevations as may be determined by a
site-specific engineering study that uses FEMA-approved analyses and that is
reviewed and approved by the City of Gainesville Public Works Department.
Policy 1.4.8 The rate of stormwater runoff from any development shall be limited to the pr-e
development (conditions existing at the point of adoption of this Plan) rate for a
site, and shall not degrade the capacity of existing stormwater facilities.
Policy 1.4.9 In conjunction with the Record of Decision as finalized by the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit issued by the Florida Department of
Environmental Protection, stormwater runoff from the Cabot-Koppers Superfund
site shall be treated on-site so that it does not pose a danger to the community.
Objective 1.5 – Continue the implementation of a maintenance program for all
surface drainage systems, that are the responsibility of the City, for the
continued effective operation of the stormwater management system.
Policy 1.5.1 The City shall continue to have a regular inspection program for all surface
drainage systems that are the responsibility of the City. Stormwater management
facilities shall be inspected during construction and periodically after
construction to determine that proper construction, operation and maintenance
are ongoing.
Policy 1.5.2 The Stormwater Management Utility Program shall include a maintenance
schedule for the regular repair and/or replacement of stormwater facilities for
which the City has responsibility.
Policy 1.5.3 Projects to correct existing deficiencies will be prioritized based on social
vulnerabilities. Projects shall be reviewed in accordance with the following
131
2025-910A
priorities in the development of the Stormwater Management Utility Capital
Improvement Program:
a. Projects designed to reduce or eliminate structure flooding in known problem
areas;
b. Projects designed to improve the quality of water flowing into receiving
creeks, lakes and sinkholes;
c. Projects designed to reduce street flooding during storm events ranging up to
the 50-year storm;
d. Projects designed to reduce or eliminate flooding potential of structures in
the 100-year floodplain;
e. Projects designed to reduce the channelization of creeks, and to restore
habitat and wetlands;
f. Projects designed to reduce maintenance costs.
Objective 1.6 – Continue to implement an integrated stormwater management
program for redevelopment.
Policy 1.6.1 The City shall implement Land Development Regulations that allow shared or
joint-use stormwater facilities, including public or private master stormwater
basins.
Policy 1.6.2 The City may allow the use of off-site stormwater management facilities to meet
the applicable stormwater quality and/or quantity standards required by the
City’s Engineering Design & Construction Manual.
Objective 1.7 – Continue to implement Land Development Regulations that
improve inspection procedures and improve coordination with other agencies
to protect, preserve or improve the quality of discharges from stormwater
management facilities to natural surface waters an d aquifers. Additionally, all
new stormwater management facilities shall meet the applicable Water
Management District's regulations.
Policy 1.7.1 The City shall continue to implement adopted Land Development Regulations
that restrict activities known to adversely affect water quality within the
Murphree Wellfield Protection Zones .
Policy 1.7.2 The City shall continue to implement adopted Land Development Regulations
that regulate erosion and sedimentation both during and after construction.
Policy 1.7.3 The City shall continue to implement code enforcement procedures and penalties
that help obtain compliance with the approved facility design and function.
Policy 1.7.4 The City will encourage Low Impact Development (LID) concepts and other
environmentally sensitive design guidelines for stormwater management
facilities and is consistent with Alachua County’s Stormwater Treatment Manua.l
132
2025-910A
Policy 1.7.5 The City shall continue to implement adopted Land Development Regulations
that promote increased volumes of groundwater recharge, for all new
development, where soil conditions permit. The City shall incorporate Low
Impact Development (LID) guidelines consistent with those by the state Water
Management Districts, and the Florida Department of Environmental Protection.
Objective 1.8 – Continue to encourage the preservation and protection of
existing drainage features.
Policy 1.8.1 The City shall continue to comply with adopted Land Development Regulations
that protect the intrinsic functions of wetlands and accommodate a variety of
wetland conditions, such as size of wetland areas, maintenance or restoration of
natural hydroperiods, and diversity of vegetation.
Policy 1.8.2 The City shall acquire rights to wetlands and other environmentally sensitive
areas in order to further the open space objectives of the Conservation, Open
Space and Groundwater Recharge Element of this Plan, and to retain the intrinsic
stormwater management functions of these areas. The hydrological and
ecological functions of related wetland areas should be preserved, restored, or
enhanced as appropriate to the extent feasible.
Policy 1.8.3 There shall not be any decrease in the capacity of floodplains nor any destruction
of creeks regulated by the “Regulation of Development Near Creeks” ordinance.
Policy 1.8.4 Continue to implement the following stormwater management facility design
guidelines that promote dual use and aesthetically pleasing facilities.
a. Joint use of retention and detention basins for habitat, open space, and
passive recreation, including the establishment and use of trails;
b. Use of native and non-invasive vegetation, in retention and detention basins
to enhance stormwater management objectives;
c. Integration of on-site retention and detention facilities with other elements of
a development through aesthetically sensitive design and appropriate
landscaping;
d. Maintenance and, where possible, enhancement of the existing hydrological
and ecological function of stream or drainage corridors, and of wetland areas
which serve stormwater facilities; and
e. Removal of invasive vegetation.
Policy 1.8.5 Stormwater management facilities shall be designed to minimize the need for
maintenance.
133
2025-910A
Potable Water and Wastewater Section
Goal 2 : Gainesville’s potable water and wastewater
infrastructure will be safe, reliable, and affordable and meet
environmental regulations.
Objective 2.1 – Provide for safe, reliable, and affordable potable water and
wastewater
Policy 2.1.1 Continue to implement the ConnectFree program for connecting existing homes
to GRU water and sewer on a voluntary basis. Continue targeted septic to sewer
conversion.
Policy 2.1.2 The following LOS standards shall be adopted for potable water:
a. Maximum Day (Peak) Design Flow: 200 gallons per capita per day;
b. Storage Capacity: ½ of peak day volume in gallons. This requirement may be
met by a combination of storage and auxiliary power;
c. Pressure: The system shall be designed for a minimum pressure of 40 psig
under forecasted peak hourly demands to assure 20 psig under extreme and
unforeseen conditions;
d. The City shall reserve potable water capacity for the annual water demand
projected by the City for the University of Florida and the power plants.
Policy 2.1.3 The following LOS standards shall be adopted for wastewater services: Average
Day Standard: 106 gallons daily flow per capita.
Policy 2.1.4 The following LOS standards shall be adopted for water supply: Average Daily
Flow: 124.5 gallons per capita per day.
Policy 2.1.5 The Joint Alachua County/City of Gainesville Water Supply Facilities Work Plan:
2025-2035 is hereby adopted by reference. Within 18 months of approval of an
updated North Florida Regional Water Supply Plan (NFRWSP), the City shall:
a. Coordinate with Alachua County to update the Joint Alachua County/City of
Gainesville Water Supply Facilities Work Plan as needed; and
b. Amend the City of Gainesville Comprehensive Plan as needed.
Policy 2.1.6 The City shall maintain forecasts of plant flow requirements and provide for plant
capacity and other facility expansions in GRU’s annually updated, five-year
capital budget to meet the LOS standards.
Policy 2.1.7 The City shall perform ongoing evaluations and studied to determine the water
and wastewater systems’ needs to meet the requirements of existing and future
customers, with the LOS standards to be employed as minimum criteria. The City
134
2025-910A
shall provide financial resources in GRU’s operating and annually updated, five-
year capital budgets to renew, replace, improve, and maintain the systems in
accordance with prudent utility practice as defined in the Utilities System
Revenue Bond Resolution (adopted June 6, 1983).
Policy 2.1.8 The City shall not commit to providing water or wastewater service if sufficient
capacities or facilities to serve the proposed project cannot be made available at
the time that the system impacts of the project will occur.
Policy 2.1.9 The City shall continue to upgrade and expand water/wastewater facilities, as
shown in the 5-Year Schedule of Capital Improvements, to meet established LOS
standards. The City shall give priority to correcting existing deficiencies in levels
of service prior to expanding facilities to new, unserved areas.
Policy 2.1.10 The City shall encourage development of propertythe development of properties
near existing service areas through the continued use of appropriate economic
incentives concerning the extension of water and wastewater services as listed
below:
a. The City shall coordinate with GRU to continue its policy of having all new
water and wastewater service connections pay the fully allocated cost of the
treatment facilities required to serve them in the form of plant connection
fees, and the cost of distribution or collection facilities,
b. The City shall coordinate with GRU to continue its policy of having a
development contribute the water and wastewater distribution and collection
system internal to a development.
c. The City shall coordinate with GRU to continue its policy that all facilities
constructed and contributed to the utility system must be approved,
inspected, and built to City standards.
Policy 2.1.11 All new developments at equivalent residential densities greater than 2 units per
acre that require potable water or wastewater treatment , within the City of
Gainesville, shall be required to connect to the centralized potable water system
and/or the centralized wastewater system, except as specified below. Equivalent
development densities shall be determined as estimated by GRU. Non-residential
development proposed to be on septic tanks must demonstrate that it will not
dispose of toxic, hazardous, or industrial waste in the septic tank.
a. New developments of existing lots in platted subdivisions and other existing
legal lots of record shall be excluded from the requirements above unless
there are existing distribution or collection facilities in the right-of-way
easements abutting the property.
b. New construction of package wastewater plants must meet the relevant
standards established by the State of Florida and the Federal government and
must connect to central wastewater treatment facilities within 5 years of
135
2025-910A
central wastewater facilities becoming available. New package plants shall
only be permitted when:
i. The developer of such temporary package treatment plant is required
to enter into a legally binding agreement that dedicates and assigns
responsibility for the proper maintenance and operation of the plant
to an appropriate agency of local government; and
ii. Such agreement shall provide adequate compensation by the
developer to the local government agency for the proper operation
and maintenance of the plant; and
iii. The package plant is approved by the appropriate government agency
assigning plant operation and maintenance as meeting standards for
design, operation and maintenance.
Objective 2.2 – Ensure that applicable water quality standards are being
followed and met.
Policy 2.2.1 The City’s land development regulations shall supplement the standards of the
applicable Water Management District to promote the maintenance of water
quality in surface waters. Such standards include:
a. Protecting the surface water resource by prohibiting excavation, filling,
channelization, mechanized land clearing, and other development activities,
except as may be authorized by the Land Development Code;
b. Requiring sedimentation controls during and after construction;
c. Protecting creek banks and vegetation;
d. Requiring treatment of the first “one inch” of stormwater runoff; and
e. Restoring previously channelized creeks identified for restoration by the City,
when feasible.
Policy 2.2.2 The City shall coordinate with the Alachua County Environmental Protection
Department, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP), the
Water Management Districts, and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
and shall support the appropriate agencies with efforts to:
a. Identify areas of pollution to surface waters and groundwater;
b. Provide on-going monitoring programs that include periodic reports that
describe environmental conditions and cleanup status; and
c. Identify parties responsible for polluted areas and require such parties to
mitigate pollution problems.
Policy 2.2.3 The City shall allow require all new development in commercial, institutional, and
industrial districts to connect to centralized sewer services where available.
Septic tanks are only allowed if: only place septic tanks:
136
2025-910A
a. In compliance with the Wellfield Protection Special Use Permit process of the
City’s Land Development Code, and if the development is in compliance with
the Alachua County Hazardous Materials Management Code; and
b. In areas not identified as regulated surface waters or wetlands.
Policy 2.2.4 The City shall cooperate with the water management districts during declared
water shortage emergencies by conserving water resources and by assisting with
the implementation of water shortage emergency declarations, orders, and
plans.
Policy 2.2.5 Pursuant to Section 373.0397, F.S., Water Management Districts have mapped
groundwater recharge areas for the Floridan aquifer. City land development
regulations shall protect the Floridan aquifer groundwater resource through
recognition of geographic areas of relative vulnerability and high aquifer recharge
characteristics. Mapping of these high aquifer recharge areas shall include
surface waters that convey flow directly to groundwater via sinkholes (stream-
to-sink surface water basins) and areas where the Floridan aquifer is otherwise
vulnerable or highly vulnerable to degradation through recharge from land
surfaces.
Policy 2.2.6 Final development orders shall require compliance with State, County, and City
septic tank rules.
Policy 2.2.7 The City shall require construction design consistent with existing terrain by
discouraging contouring, cut and fill, or other practices that cause soil erosion.
Policy 2.2.8 The City shall maintain land development regulations for regulated surface
waters and wetlands that require:
a. Buffers and/or setbacks from regulated surface waters and wetlands;
b. Development to minimize erosion and sediment pollution to regulated
surface waters and wetlands;
c. No net increase in the rate of runoff from development sites adjacent to
surface waters and wetlands;
d. Retention or detention of runoff from developments adjacent to regulated
surface waters and wetlands, through on-site filtration in accordance with
the Public Works Design Manual;
e. Retention of vegetation integral to the ecological value of regulated surface
waters and wetlands;
f. Compliance with the City’s adopted criteria for controlling sediment and
erosion;
g. Allowance of transfer of development intensity and density from lower to
higher elevations of a site; and
h. Prohibition on the installation of all septic tanks.
137
2025-910A
Policy 2.2.9 The City shall maintain its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit from FDEP in order to improve surface water quality.
Policy 2.2.10 The City shall explore projects for improving water quality in its watersheds.
Objective 2.3 – Actively pursue water conservation projects in accordance with
the adopted 10-year Water Supply Facilities Work Plan.
Policy 2.3.1 The City shall maintain water conservation programs that are consistent with the
Water Management District’s plans and the Joint Alachua County/City of
Gainesville Water Supply Facilities Work Plan.
Policy 2.3.2 The City shall inform the public of the requirements of Section 373.62, F.S.,
regarding automatic lawn sprinkler systems.
Policy 2.3.3 Coordinate with GRU to continue to offer water conservation education and
information to residential and non-residential customers through its
Energy/Water Survey Program.
Policy 2.3.4 Coordinate with GRU to continue to minimize water losses from unaccounted
sources through its ongoing water loss reduction program.
Policy 2.3.5 Coordinate with GRU to continue the current conservation rate structure as an
economic means of promoting water conservation throughout the year.
Policy 2.3.6 The City shall continue to include water conservation techniques, including
“Florida Friendly” landscaping, in the City landscape ordinance.
Policy 2.3.7 Coordinate with GRU to continue to offer free water conservation information as
part of at least one utility billing statement per year.
Policy 2.3.8 Coordinate with GRU to require the use of reclaimed water in reclaimed water
service areas.
Policy 2.3.9 The City shall continue to require low-volume plumbing devices, consistent with
applicable building codes.
Policy 2.3.10 The City and GRU will work with Alachua County and the water management
districts to develop a model ordinance or plan to better regulate private
irrigation wells.
Policy 2.3.11 The City will conserve water on City properties by maximizing the use of “Florida
Friendly” landscaping to the extent feasible in new landscaping projects.\
138
2025-910A
Conservation Section
Goal 3: All people in Gainesville enjoy a healthy environment,
with clean air, water, land, and access to natural areas
Environmental health is linked to human health. Exposure to poor air and water quality can lead
to increased incidence of illnesses such as asthma, cancer, and waterborne diseases that would
otherwise be preventable. Accessibility to natural areas such as parks, greenways, and trails
also effects health in many ways, from providing opportunities for exercise and recreation, to
mental health benefits from spending time in nature. By improving air and water quality, and
ensuring all residents have access to clean water, air, and natural areas, regardless of where
they live, we are investing in the health of our residents.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Heat vulnerability by community
• Air and water quality of neighborhood
• Acreage of park lands, open space, and conservation lands by community
• Qualitative assessment of park lands, open space, and conservation lands by community
• Number of active site remediations and completed site cleanups
139
2025-910A
• Results of social surveys to determine success of mediation efforts
Objective 3.1 – Study and protect existing environmental resources .
Policy 3.1.1 Continue to implement and update the City’s Urban Forest Management Plan
(UFMP) and Ecological Analysis. The City will build on the UFMP and incorporate
socioeconomic, heat vulnerability, pollution, and public health data into the
analysis to guide future investment and resource prioritization, while meeting
current objectives of the UFMP. Actions will seek to address shading/canopy
cover, energy savings, air and water quality, greenhouse gas sequestration,
equitable access to parks and greenways, stormwater attenuation, access to
outreach and education efforts, and addressing values specific to neighborhoods
or districts for capital improvement projects. They will also revise the social
survey to ensure all communities and demographic groups are reached and
included.
Policy 3.1.2 Develop strategies to address barriers to the productive use of citywide
brownfield sites with a focus on areas that can address community needs such as
parks, housing, and other community-serving uses like grocery stores. The City
will develop strategies that may include cost shares or permitting fee waivers to
overcome the burden of cleanup costs and assistance with community
engagement and communications to develop community-supported plans for
brownfield redevelopment.
Objective 3.2 – Establish minimum standards for protection of environmentally
sensitive resources
Policy 3.2.1 Development located between 35 and 150 feet from the break in slope at the top
of a regulated creek bank is presumed to have a detrimental impact unless
demonstrated otherwise. Creeks: Between 35 and 150 feet from the break in
slope at the top of the bank, there is a rebuttable presumption that development
is detrimental to the regulated creek. Development must conform to applicable
provisions of the land development regulations that prohibit development within
a minimum of 35 feet of the break in slope at the top of the bank of any regulated
creeks.
Policy 3.2.2 Developments containing wetlands must avoid loss of function of degradation of
wetland habitat and/or wetland hydrology as the highest priority. Where impact
is unavoidable, degradation or loss of function shall be minimized, and the
applicant must demonstrate that the project is clearly in the public interest. The
City shall develop and implement land development regulations that at a
minimum:
a. Establish criteria that are at least consistent with the relevant criteria of
Section 373.414(1), F.S., for determining whether the project is clearly in the
140
2025-910A
public interest and expand on existing criteria to incorporate equity and
environmental justice considerations.
b. Require the use of the most current functional assessment methodology that
is in use by regulatory agencies in Florida for determining mitigation
requirements for impacts on wetlands.
c. Specify wetland creation as a mitigation strategy that shall be considered
only after substantial evidence, based on the functional assessment,
indicates that the preservation, enhancement, or restoration of existing
wetlands is less desirable or effective as an option.
d. Establish bonding, long-term monitoring and enforceable long-term
maintenance requirements for wetland mitigation projects to ensure that the
negative impacts have been mitigated. Monitoring reports shall be reviewed
by the City of Gainesville or other appropriate monitoring agency or reviewing
entity to ensure mitigation criteria are met, with regulatory fees paid by the
permitted applicant. The mitigation plan must be approved prior to the
approval and initiation of the project.
e. Require off-site mitigation to be performed within the same basin and sub-
basin in which the impact occurred, unless it is shown that mitigation within
the basin is not feasible or that mitigation outside the basin is more
appropriate. The order of preference for the location of mitigated area(s) in
relation to the impacted areas will be established in the land development
regulations (LDRs).
f. Require that development shall not cause indirect or secondary wetland
impacts off-site.
g. Require a minimum buffer distance of 35 feet and an average buffer distance
of 50 feet between the landward extent of any wetland and the developed
area. Larger buffers may be warranted as specified in the land development
regulations.
h. Specify that the protections for wetlands shall be extended to all wetland
delineated in accordance with Chapter 62-340, F.A.C., regardless of whether
they are currently mapped by the City of Gainesville.
i. Require review and approval of wetland mitigation projects by qualified
professionals.
j. Require protection of listed species in wetlands.
k. Require that wetlands impacted as a result of noncompliance or unauthorized
excavation, filling, drainage, mechanical land clearing, or other development
activity on or subsequent to the effective date of this policy be, at the owner’s
expense, either restored to their original function and condition prior to such
damage, or mitigated for pursuant to the mitigation requirements of this
Comprehensive Plan or the Land Development Code.
Policy 3.2.3 Development near natural lakes must be designed to protect lake quality and
ecological function. Dredge and fill activities are to be avoided whenever
practicable, and alternative approaches should be evaluated before such actions
141
2025-910A
are considered. Lakes: Developments containing or adjacent to a natural lake (or
lakes) must not adversely impact the condition of the lake. Dredge and fill shall
be discouraged and other alternatives considered. Development shall be
prohibited within 75 feet of the landward extent of a lake .
Policy 3.2.4 Natural and Archaeological Resource Areas: Developments within or including an
upland area identified as a significant natural community, listed species habitat,
strategic ecosystem based on areas identified and described in the KBN/Golder
Associates Report, “Alachua County Ecological Inventory Project” (1996),
significant geological resource feature, or a significant archaeological resource
must submit a resource inventory and assessment for the parcel. Based on the
inventory and any required verification of the extent of the resource area, land
development regulations shall provide for the set-aside of identified resource
areas for conservation and resource protection.
Policy 3.2.5 The City shall collaborate with local, regional, and state environmental agencies
(including Alachua County and the St. Johns and Suwannee River Water
Management Districts) to develop basin management plans, which shall identify
wetlands of special concern, disturbed wetlands, and appropriate sites for
mitigation. The plans shall also consider those factors affecting the structure and
functions of wetlands.
Policy 3.2.6 The city hereby adopts by reference the General Soil Map for Alachua County,
Florida, as presented in the Soil Survey of Alachua County. The City shall
incorporate by reference the General Soil Map– Alachua County Florida, that is
the Soil Survey of Alachua County (1985, United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service).
Policy 3.2.7 The City shall maintain an updated inventory of identified environmentally
significant resources in the Geographic Information System (GIS) Map Library
located on the City’s website. If additional resources are identified or as
annexations occur, these properties shall be subject to regulations keyed to the
resource present at the site. The Environmentally Significant Land and Resources
Map Series within the Future Land Use Map Series shall be updated as
annexations occur and when additional resources are identified.
Policy 3.2.8 Future road alignments shall minimize their impact on environmentally
significant natural communities, wildlife corridors, and listed species habitats.
Policy 3.2.9 The city shall create and update land management plans every ten years for each
city-owned conservation area
Policy 3.2.109 The City shall periodically inventory environmentally significant plants, animals,
and habitats within City-owned parks or open space parcels,; update on an on-
going basis a list of plants, animals, and habitats that are to be protected, and
monitor the populations of these plants and animals.
142
2025-910A
Policy 3.2.110 The City’s land development regulations shall protect environmentally significant
lands and resources by:
a. Providing opportunities for alternative and innovative site development ;
b. Providing setback and parking standards;
c. Providing mandatory mitigation to ensure no net loss of functions and values
when wetlands are unavoidably lost;
d. Allowing for, or requiring the clustering of development away from
environmentally significant resources;
e. Restricting on-site waste disposal systems; and
f. Allowing transfer or land use density and/or intensity to retain development
potential from set-aside areas that are required to meet the goals, policies,
and regulations of this Element and the Land Development Code.
Policy 3.2.121 Conservation strategies for significant natural communities, listed species
habitats, and strategic ecosystem resources shall include, at a minimum:
a. Conservation of natural resource of uplands, including areas of significant
natural communities, listed species habitats, significant geological features,
and strategic ecosystem resource areas through set-aside, management, and
buffering requirements;
b. Installation of native vegetation landscaping and removal of invasive trees
and shrubs; and
c. Setbacks.
Objective 3.3 – Pursue land acquisition as a means of protecting
environmentally sensitive lands for the purposes of conservation
Policy 3.3.1 Prioritize land acquisition for conservation and park uses in areas that lack
dedicated conservation areas. The City will maximize the protection of
environmentally sensitive lands through the nomination of properties for
acquisition with the Alachua County Forever program and other relevant funds.
The City will focus on improving access and conserving lands containing high-
quality, environmentally sensitive resources.
Priority actions include:
a. Collect data on Gainesville parks accessibility and identify barriers to access.
b. Develop strategies and pursue funding to address management and staffing
challenges for the acquired conservation of lands and parks.
b.c. Utilize accepted fire mitigation strategies to encourage ecological
rejuvenation and provide protection to adjacent properties in city-owned
conservation areas. Techniques can include: prescribed fire and creation and
maintenance of fire lines.
Policy 3.3.2 The City shall keep in force land development regulations that require new
developments to dedicate land and easements, within federal constitutional
143
2025-910A
guidelines, particularly for the creation of buffers along and around surface
waters and natural reservations and to facilitate the development of greenways
and other open space.
Policy 3.3.3 The City shall pursue funding or the allocation of budget for the purchase and/or
management of environmentally significant open space and of active and passive
recreation sites.
Policy 3.3.4 The City shall maintain a registry of real properties owned by the City of
Gainesville that are acquired or used for conservation, recreation or cultural
purposes, and that are deemed by the City Commission to be worthy of the
highest level of protection based on presence and quality of environmentally
significant resource and community need.
Resilience Section
Goal 4: Gainesville will make significant progress to reduce the
City’s carbon footprint, incorporate renewable sources for
energy production, reduce landfill waste, and will lead
regional efforts to combat climate change. Gainesville will
make significant progress in lowering the City’s environmental
144
2025-910A
impact, expanding the use of clean and sustainable energy
sources, reducing landfill waste, and leading regional efforts to
promote environmental resilience and sustainability.
Gainesvi lle will reduce its environmental impact and be a
regional leader in environmental resilience and sustainability
through the expansion of clean and sustainable energy sources
and reducing landfill waste.
Now more than ever, it is important for Gainesville to responsibly manage its resources in light
of growing environmental and population pressures.increasing pressures of climate change and
population growth. By lowering overall emissions, supporting residents in using energy more
efficiently, and reducing and diverting waste, Gainesville can remain adaptable and thrive amid
these challenges. reducing our carbon footprint, helping residents reduce their energy use, and
by reducing and diverting our waste, we can ensure Gainesville is able to adapt and thrive
despite these pressures.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Per capita energy and water consumption by community
• Trends in implementation and effectiveness of energy, water, and urban forestry
conservation programs across the City and by census block group
• City government operational emissions compared to a carbon impacts versus
benchmark year
• Percentage of total energy sourced from clean or low-emission options energy sourced
from renewables
• Results of social surveys to determine success of outreach and education programs
• Recycling set-out rates by community.
• Amount of lLandfilled waste per capita
• GHG Community-wide emissions per capita
• Implementation of Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI )
• Percentage of municipal fleet converted to zero or low-emission vehicles
Objective 4.1 – Advance the initiatives of the Climate Resilienc y Plan related to
overall community adaptation and impact reduction . climate resiliency and
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions .
Policy 4.1.1 By 2045, Gainesville will meet community energy needs through modern,
efficient, and forward-looking technologies that support long-term resilience. A
balanced approach that considers environmental stewardship, cost
effectiveness, and community well-being is essential to responsibly meeting
145
2025-910A
energy needs. The City will explore opportunities to enhance the performance
and efficiency of its facilities. Reliability, resilience, and affordability remain
priorities for all neighbors. By 2045, Gainesville will meet all energy needs with
technology that achieves the goal of net-zero greenhouse gas emissions.
Sustainability, an approach that considers environment, costs, and social impact,
is an essential element to responsibly meeting energy needs. The City will seek
opportunities to add solar panels to City properties. Sustainability and
affordability are important to all neighbors, particularly those that are lower-
income. The City will continue to work with GRU to seek out opportunities to
improve service while reducing costs and developing new revenue streams that
help to keep GRU financially sustainable and help keep rates affordable.
Policy 4.1.2 Continue to support climate strategic planning and policy development,
recommend priority investments and funding allocations for climate initiatives,
and coordinate efforts across municipal infrastructure, utilities, and land
management functions. The City shall facilitate interdepartmental coordination
and support the implementation of resilience strategies by:
a. Coordinating through the Joint Water and Climate Policy Board with City
departments, GRU, Alachua County, community members and others.
b. Actively participating in regional coordination efforts with Alachua County
and neighboring cities and regions to address climate and environmental
justice.
Policy 4.1.3 Continue to partner and collaborate with other municipal, state, and federal
entities and organizations to advance resilience and sustainability objectives.
Policy 4.1.4 Collaborate with Alachua County, neighboring municipalities, and regional
partners to implement climate resilience strategies focused on low income and
historically underrepresented communities.
Policy 4.1.5 Lower carbon impacts from City government operations. The City will work
across departments to reduce energy consumption in new and current buildings,
identify solar opportunities onopportunities to improve City property, expand the
City’s electric low-emission vehicle fleet after conducting a life-cycle cost
analysis, reduce vehicle idling times, and strengthen data collection on
operational performance identify and correct gaps in existing data on the City’s
carbon footprint and environmental impact, and collect data and report on
progress against targets on an annual basis. All new construction and major
renovations of City-owned buildings are required to follow the Gainesville Green
Building Program, which mandates the use of LEED or a comparable rating
system to reduce energy use and enhance building efficiency.
Policy 4.1.6 Promote energy and resource conservation in vulnerable communities through
programs and regulations. The City will create education programs focused on
climate risk, climate science, and solutions. Outreach will be conducted focusing
146
2025-910A
on energy, water conservation, and urban forestry programs that are targeted to
the needs of residents who are the most vulnerable to environmental risks .
Objective 4.2 – Provide for renewable, reliable, and affordable energy.
Policy 4.2.1 Promote and support programs to assist low-income homeowners and owners of
low-income housing to modernize on-site infrastructure. Many low-income
homeowners have older homes which are energy inefficient which result in
increased utility costs, and higher vulnerability during storm events and to
extreme temperatures. Promote and support programs that help homeowners
and property owners modernize on-site infrastructure. Many older homes are
less efficient and more vulnerable during storm events and periods of extreme
temperatures, leading to higher utility costs and reduced comfort. These
programs will encourage upgrades that improve safety, durability, and overall
performance.
a. The City and GRU will continue to implement programs such as LEEP+ that
assist homeowners in improving energy and water use efficiency.
b. The City and GRU will continue to implement programs such as
ConnectFree which provides funding that supports connecting to water
and wastewater services.
c. The City and GRU will also continue to pursue state and federal funding
sources and implement new or expanded programs as appropriate.
Policy 4.2.2 Coordinate with GRU to provide customers with education and incentive
programs to encourage natural resource conservation, energy conservation, and
pollution prevention.
Policy 4.2.3 Continue to create and expand incentives in the Land Development Code to
promote sustainable forms of development. This includes but is not limited to
development that is less car-dependent, higher-density, more energy efficient,
less water intensive, lower-impact in terms of materials and natural resources,
and responsive to climate risk.
Policy 4.2.4 Coordinate with GRU to will continue the LEEP+ program Low-income Energy
Efficiency Program Plus to serve residents with the greatest need. The program
currently assists low-income customers in need with home improvements that
can lower a household’s electric bill and reduce energy consumptionincrease
energy efficiency.
Objective 4.3 – Advance the waste -reducing initiatives policies of the City’s
Zero Waste PlanInitiative
147
2025-910A
Policy 4.3.1 By 2040, the City will aims to divert 90% or more of citywide solid waste from
methane producing landfills by expanding composting, recycling, and waste
reduction efforts, including community-driven effortsthe following:
a. Explore adoption or codification of the City’s Zero Waste Initiative Plan to
modify existing policies, systems, programs, and infrastructure to reduce
waste and improve diversion opportunities, reducing the need for solid waste
facilities.
b. Explore a practical implementation of a food waste diversion program for
commercial, single-family, and multifamily properties.
c. Research, develop and implementExplore the development of a program that
utilizes the beneficial uses of food waste and other waste products such as
yard waste and wastewater biosolids. The City will continue to partner with
GRU, Alachua County and the University of Florida to evaluate the use of food
and yard waste along with wastewater biosolids to develop soil amendments.
When evaluations support the use and inclusion of soil amendments in
development projects, the City will seek to draft a new soil amendment
ordinance to support the beneficial use of wastewater residue, biosolids, and
food waste.
d. Explore the development of The City will develop a city-wide an ordinance to
require any construction or demolition permits to recycle, reuse, and/or
recover materials. The City will work with the County to site regional facilities
to process the reuse of materials and expand current processing capacity.
e. The City will draftExplore the development of an ordinance that supports the
use of recyclable materials in building construction and encourages or
directly incentivizes the development of structures intended to have a
lifespan of fifty years or greater.
Policy 4.3.2 The City shall minimize the amount of solid waste that must be disposed of in a
landfill. In order of priority, minimization shall be attained by (1) source
reduction of waste; (2) re-use; (3) recycling; (4) composting; and (5) landfilling.
Policy 4.3.3 The City shall continue to utilize procurement procedures that increase the use of
recycled materials, reduce the consumption of single use plastics, take into
consideration the life cycle costs, and greenhouse gas effectsdecrease overall
environmental impacts.
Policy 4.3.4 The City shall explore options to expand the food waste diversion infrastructure
to single family and multifamily developments where economically feasible.
Policy 4.3.5 The City shall promote Zero Waste strategies through public education.
Policy 4.3.6 By 2035, the City shall endeavor to achieve a 98% participation rate among all
multi-family residential and commercial properties in an approved recycling
program. By 2035, 98% of all multi-family residential and commercial properties
shall participate in a recycling program.
148
2025-910A
Policy 4.3.7 The City shall continue to require new multi-family, commercial, and institutional
developments to include recycling receptacles. Recycling receptacles shall also
be placed at public parks, the airport, and other places of public assembly.
Policy 4.3.8 Maintain at least a 75% set out rate for the residential curbside recycling
program.
Policy 4.3.9 Continue to expand the two-bin program to encourage separation of paper
recyclables from plastic, metals, and glass throughout the mandatory collection
area of the City by making additional capacity available to neighbors when
requested.
Policy 4.3.10 Enforce illegal dumping laws. Such enforcement shall include efforts to clean up
existing illegal dump sites and develop or revise ordinances to increase the
feasibility of prosecuting illegal dumpers.
Policy 4.3.11 Through coordination with the County and other waste material handlers, the
City will continue to participate in a periodic, convenient special waste collection
program for difficult-to-dispose-of wastes, such as tires, used oil, batteries, and
asbestos, and will utilize the Household Hazardous Waste Center to promote
increased reuse and recycling by the general public.
Policy 4.3.12 Continue to receive and publicize an annual report prepared by Alachua County,
as set forth by Sec. 403.706(7), F.S., describing trends in the county solid waste
management program, including, at a minimum, amounts by type of waste,
amount and type of waste recycled, and percentage of the population
participating in recycling.
Policy 4.3.13 The City, in cooperation with Alachua County, shall continue to sponsor solid and
hazardous waste education programs for school students and interested citizens.
Policy 4.3.14 The City shall continue to follow the provisions of the source reduction and
recycling procurement policy that is intended to increase the recycled content of
products purchased and used by the City, reduce waste in the manufacture and
use of products purchased and used by the City, and encourage businesses that
promote recycling to locate within the Gainesville area.
Policy 4.3.15 The following LOS standard for disposal and collection capacity shall be
established: 0.655 tons of solid waste per capita per year disposed (3.6 pounds
of solid waste per capita per day disposed). The City shall continue to maintain
contracts with solid waste haulers and landfill operators that require
replacement and purchase of collection trucks necessary to collect 1.07 tons of
solid waste per capita per year (5.9 pounds per capita per day).
Policy 4.3.16 The City shall continue to ensure that waste tonnages being generated within city
limits are being accurately monitored by requiring monthly reporting of solid
waste tonnages being delivered to disposal facilities as required by Section
149
2025-910A
403.706(18), F.S. Monthly tonnages shall also be reported for recyclables
(including yard trash).
Objective 4.4 – Manage hazardous materials in compliance with the Alachua
County Hazardous Materials Management Code and other applicable
regulations.
Policy 4.4.1 The City’s land development regulations shall require the handling of hazardous
materials in such a way as to prevent degradation of the natural environment. At
a minimum, this shall be achieved by complying with the Alachua County
Hazardous Materials Management Code and the Alachua County Murphree
Wellfield Protection Code, which:
a. Prohibit certain new hazardous materials facilities and underground storage
tank systems from locating within the unconfined zone of the Floridan
aquifer;
b. Prohibit new hazardous materials facilities from locating within the primary
and secondary wellfield protection zones of the Murphree wellfield and
establish requirements for locating hazardous materials facilities within the
tertiary protection zones of the Murphree wellfield. Within the secondary
zone, vehicular fuel storage subject to Section 376.317, F.S., may be allowed ;
c. Require new Class C and D hazardous materials facilities, as identified in the
Alachua County Hazardous Materials Management Code, to maintain large
setbacks from surface waters, wells, and floodplains; and
d. Require stringent hazardous materials storage and containment designs,
periodic monitoring, inspections, a management plan, fees, and penalties for
non-compliance.
Policy 4.4.2 The City shall coordinate with the Alachua County Environmental Protection
Department and other governmental agencies in identifying pollution problems
and providing documentation and other relevant assistance as appropriate and
feasible towards the mitigation and remediation of pollution problems, including
assistance as necessary in cases where sanctions may be imposed for violations
of applicable environmental regulations.
Policy 4.4.3 The City shall remain actively engaged as a stakeholder in the cleanup of the
Cabot Carbon/Koppers Superfund Site.
Policy 4.4.4 The City shall continue to coordinate with the Florida Departments of
Transportation and Environmental Protection regarding the transportation of
hazardous waste within City limits.
Policy 4.4.5 The City shall continue to coordinate with the Alachua County Department of
Environmental Protection, which requires submission of a hazardous materials
management plan as a contingency for all development approvals for sites where
hazardous materials may be handled.
150
2025-910A
Policy 4.4.6 The City will continue to promote responsible handling of hazardous waste by
residents and low-quantity producers by working with Alachua County EPD and
Solid Waste Department
Policy 4.4.7 Except for designated incinerators and landfills, the City shall continue to
prohibit the burning of refuse, trash, or garbage, in accord with applicable
provisions of Chapters 10 and 27, Gainesville Code of Ordinances.
Policy 4.4.8 Strengthen waste-related services across all Gainesville communities, prioritizing
expansion and investment in communities that are currently underserved by:
a. . Public Works will continueContinuing to allocate resources to educate
residents on the individual and community-wide benefits of reducing,
reusing, and recycling.
b. Additionally, the City will provideProviding opportunities to properly
dispose of household hazardous waste by conducting collection events in
low-income neighborhoods.
151
2025-910A
Sustainability Section
Goal 5: City government and community members together
balance conservation and environmental preservation with
community needs.
Gainesville’s natural environment is central to the identity, health, and resilience of our
community. As we grow and evolve, it is essential to thoughtfully balance development and
infrastructure needs with the protection of ecosystems, water quality, and green spaces. By
working collaboratively with residents, community organizations, and other stakeholders, the
city will prioritize responsible land use, preserve valuable environmental resources, and ensure
equitable access to nature. Through policies, programs, and planning rooted in long-term
sustainability, Gainesville can support both environmental stewardship and a high quality of life
for all.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Trends in use and success of incentives for design flexibility around environmentally
significant resources and tree mitigation fee offsets.
• Acres of land conserved as offsets to development in and around environmentally
sensitive areas.
• Tree mitigation fund expenditures
152
2025-910A
• Number and location of projects that have used incentives of reduced tree mitigation
fees for providing 100% affordable housing.
• Number of high-quality heritage trees preserved.
• Total acreage of impacted environmentally sensitive or significant areas vs acreage put
into permanent conservation and/or improved.
• Map of areas of high flood risk and insufficient or inadequate stormwater management
systems
• Map of undeveloped strategic ecosystem areas
• Map and acreage of nature parks and conservation areas
• Map of current and projected tree canopy coverage
Objective 5.1 – New and infill development must conserve natural areas,
environmentally-sensitive areas, and provide landscaping as needed
Policy 5.1.1 Develop strategies to promote design flexibility around environmentally
significant features in order to facilitate resource conservation. The Department
of Sustainable Development will create LDC policies and incentives that would
allow for flexibility in development design on properties containing or adjacent to
environmentally significant features in order to facilitate conservation of these
areas while attempting to meet project goals. Policies and incentives may
include, but are not limited to, density bonuses, credit for preservation of
greenspace, reduced building setbacks, reduced required parking, offset of
landscaping requirements for resource preservation, and encouraging use of LID
in stormwater design.
Policy 5.1.2 Implement policies to encourage the use of design practices that reduce
landscape water demand. The City shall promote programs, incentives, and
polices to encourage the use of native, drought-tolerant landscapes, and reduce
the need for high-volume irrigation for landscaping.
a. Public Works, the Department of Sustainable Development, and Parks,
Recreation, and Cultural Affairs will develop and implement an inter-
departmental strategic plan to promote the use of green infrastructure into
the City’s, capital improvements, stormwater, and water conservation
programs.
b. The Department of Sustainable Development will explore Land Development
Code amendments to require 1) all new landscape designs to meet LEED
certification standards on new developments, and 2) a requirement for new
landscape designs to incorporate a minimum percentage of native species.
Policy 5.1.3 Continue to enforce and improve policies designed to protect and restore
environmentally sensitive areas, including wetlands, surface waters, significant
habitats, listed species habitats, strategic ecosystems, significant geologic
153
2025-910A
features, and heritage trees. The City will continue to coordinate with Alachua
County on the identification and protection of environmentally sensitive areas .
a. Coordination with Alachua County will include collaboration on enforcement
activities and the development of LDC policies that strengthen existing
protections.
b. Develop and strengthen LDC policies that protect and/or encourage the
restoration of existing impacted environmentally sensitive areas.
c. Public Works and PRCA will manage public lands in an environmentally
sustainable manner. Decision making will include factors such as GHG
emissions, offsets, and per capita carbon footprint. Management practices
will exclude impacts on environmentally sensitive areas except when deemed
necessary for the provision of critical infrastructure.
Objective 5.2 – Advance the goals and policies of the Urban Forest
Management Plan through continued pursuit of tree preservation and
utilization of the tree mitigation program and funds.
Policy 5.2.1 Develop strategies, including those identified in the Urban Forest Master Plan, to
promote tree preservation, high-quality landscapes, and effective use of tree
mitigation funds where they are needed most while also reducing the burden of
mitigation fees on our most vulnerable neighbors. The Department of Sustainable
Development and Public Works will enforce and improve upon new LDC policies
designed to reduce heritage tree mitigation fees for 100% affordable housing
projects and allow tree mitigation fee offset by investing in alternatives to
promote a healthy urban forest. Some of these strategies include:
a. Implementing an outreach and education program to inform neighbors of the
changes to tree mitigation policy for affordable housing and alternative tree
mitigation offsets.
b. Developing alternatives for tree mitigation offsets that promote healthy
landscapes targeted to different development types. This allows individuals
to use funds that would normally be paid toward tree mitigation to be used
on their own properties to improve their landscapes.
c. Targeting investment of tree mitigation funds for purchase of conservation
lands and tree planting projects in underserved communities that lack these
resources.
d. Building on and improving existing incentives for preservation of existing
trees on new development.
Policy 5.2.2 The City shall recognize the Urban Forest Management Plan as the strategic plan
for the management of Gainesville’s urban forest.
154
2025-910A
Policy 5.2.3 Develop an annual tree planting plan with the goal to plant at least 400 trees (or
650 inch-diameters at chest height) within City limits annually and encourage
developers and citizens to plant at least 600 trees annually. At least 75 percent
of the trees should be native to north Florida.
Policy 5.2.4 The City shall adopt land development regulations for new development that
require the following:
a. Use of “Florida-friendly landscaping” as defined in Section 373.185, F.S., and a
reduction in allowable turf area;
b. Energy conservation through tree and shrub canopy requirements in the Land
Development Code that result in shade for buildings and pavement;
c. Species diversity in new plantings in order to reduce the effect of tree species
loss due to insect or disease outbreaks. No more than 50 percent of any one
genus shall be allowed on any site plan, except within airport flight paths and
street tree plantings. Although street tree diversity shall be attained
citywide, a given street should be uniform with respect to genus, size, and
shape; and
d. A plan for the removal of invasive trees and shrubs, which shall be submitted
at the time of development review .
Policy 5.2.5 The City shall require that removal of regulated trees that are not subject to
development plan approval shall be mitigated by on or off-site tree planting (or
an equivalent payment in lieu).
Policy 5.2.6 The City shall promote tree-lined streetscapes that preserve trees and are
compatible with existing infrastructure. Strategies such as placing overhead
utilities underground, using aerial (tree) cabling, planting trees compatible with
overhead utilities, and reserving street right-of-way for trees shall be
implemented, when economically feasible. All trimming within the public right-
of-way shall follow the standards of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) A300 and Z133.1, in order to minimize the physical and aesthetic harm to
trees that must be pruned.
Policy 5.2.7 The City shall remove invasive trees and shrubs from its rights-of-way and
property and shall inform private property owners of the benefits of removing
invasive vegetation.
Policy 5.2.8 Exclude invasive vegetation from plant material permitted in landscape plans
and continue to encourage the use of native plants in landscape plans.
Policy 5.2.9 Maintain land development regulations that protect heritage, champion, and
other regulated trees as an important community resource. The regulations at a
minimum shall include provisions for:
a. Modifications to land development regulations in order to protect and
preserve regulated trees;
155
2025-910A
b. Levying of fines for the unlawful removal of trees as provided by the Code of
Ordinances;
c. Setback requirements to protect trees before, during, and after construction;
and
d. Adequate underground space for root development of newly planted trees .
156
2025-910A
157
Our Health and Wellbeing
2025-910A
Our Health and Wellbeing
Recreation and Open Space Section
Health and wellbeing in Gainesville means fostering a community where every individual has
the opportunity to thrive physically, mentally, socially, and economically. It reflects a holistic
state of wellness that goes beyond medical care to include equitable access to housing,
nutritious food, quality education, employment, transportation, clean environments, and social
connection.
This definition is grounded in the understanding that health is shaped by the conditions in which
people are born, live, learn, work, and age. In Gainesville, advancing health and wellbeing
requires:
• Addressing barriers that affect communities with health disparities;
• Innovating collaboratively to design and implement creative, community-centered
solutions;
• Building trust and authentic relationships between institutions, residents, and
grassroots organizations;
• Empowering neighborhoods through shared leadership and culturally relevant
supports;
• Aligning resources and data across sectors to make informed, sustainable
improvements.
Ultimately, health and wellbeing in Gainesville is about creating a resilient, inclusive, and
connected community where all people—regardless of background or zip code—can reach
their full potential.
Where We Are Now and How We Got Here
There are many components contributing to the ability to lead healthy lives: access to
affordable nutritious food; a quality park within walking or biking distance; access to affordable
healthcare for both physical and mental wellbeing; and social support after experiencing a
disaster or life-changing circumstance, among many others. Economic stability and access to
quality education are contributing factors to quality of life as well. Health and wellbeing are
dependent on multiple factors working together, which span from policy to community
programs, to family practice, to individual knowledge and behavior. Many of these components
are within the influence of the city to improve the health and quality of life of our neighbor.s
Today, who you are and where you live in Gainesville impacts your ability to lead a healthy and
fulfilling life. As defined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, health disparities
are preventable differences in the burden of disease, injury, violence, or opportunities, and are
directly related to unequal distribution of social, political, economic, and environmental
158
2025-910A
resources. Here are some examples from various sources highlighting health disparities in
Gainesville:
• The 2025 Health Equity Index demonstrated high socioeconomic need correlating with
poor health outcomes in East and particularly Northeast Gainesville for the zip codes
32603 and 32609 (Conduent Healthy communities Institute, 2025).
• Life expectancy for Alachua County from 2020-2022 was 77.7 years, slightly lower than
the Florida average of 78.1 years. Furthermore, Non-Hispanic (NH) Black/African
Americans in Alachua County had a 7% lower life expectancy of 72.3 years as compared
to the overall life expectancy (UFHealth Community Needs Assessment, 2022).
• Black residents face higher incidence of chronic diseases that require continued care
such as diabetes, hypertension, and obesity than White residents. In 2023, 39.2% of the
NH Black/African American adult population in Florida was diagnosed with obesity as
compared to 29.6% of White adults and 28.5% of Hispanic adults, depicted below.
(Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), 2023).
• Similar trends were found for incidence and mortality of hypertension, diabetes, and
stroke.
• The infant death rate was almost four times higher among Black residents compared to
White and Hispanic residents.
159
2025-910A
• Cancer incidence and mortality is yet another area where health disparities are
apparent. The below charts illustrate the higher burden of cancer incidence, as well as
greater mortality from cancer of Black residents.
Access to healthcare shifts within zip codes. While Alachua County has almost three times the
number of physicians and double the number of hospital beds per 100,000 people compared to
the state of Florida, those resources are not distributed equitably. Western areas of the County
have more than four times the number of health clinics and urgent care centers than eastern
areas, and East Gainesville in particular suffers from a lack of specialty care clinics.
Another major barrier for low-income, especially Black neighbors, is the ability to access
culturally sensitive healthcare. Representation in healthcare providers and even within the
healthcare environment, can improve health outcomes. Physicians often don ot receive training
on culturally sensitive behaviors and prejudices on certain groups and medical mistrust leads to
delays in routine health screenings, particularly for black residents.
Neighbors living in areas with low transit access, especially those in areas like East Gainesville
due to decades of racially motivated policies like redlining, have a more difficult time accessing
care, especially if they do not own a car.
Low-income residents may be more likely to:
160
2025-910A
• Be inadequately insured
• Not be able to take time off work to go to a healthcare clinic
• Not be able to afford life-saving equipment including smoke alarms or health-related
equipment
• Not buy fresh and nutritious food, which can be costly compared to their unhealthy,
cheaper counterparts
• Not have a park nearby that they can exercise in
• Not know where to go for medications or other forms of care
Gainesville neighbors also face barriers with respect to language, literacy/education level,
disability status, gender identity, and sexual orientation, which often compound with other
minority identities. For example, immigrants in Gainesville face similar challenges. “With
immigrants contributing 1/4 of the population growth in Gainesville and currently making up
11.3% of the total population, it is imperative the city make greater efforts in providing greater
access to care for groups who experience these barriers. Only 13% of immigrants in the city
receive Medicare or Medicaid, compared with 25% of US born Gainesville residents in 2019. In
addition, 43.1% of immigrants in the city are not eligible to become a naturalized citizen making
it difficult to access social services or receive any form of health care coverages” (Gainesville
Immigrant Neighbor Inclusion Initiative “New Americans in the City of Gainesville?”,O ctober
2021).
The Florida Department of Health in Alachua County completed the Community Health
Assessment process in 2024 (Alachua County Community Health Improvement Plan, 2024).
Through this assessment, neighbors and stakeholders provided insights into strengths and
challenges of Alachua County:
Alachua County Community Health Assessment (2024) Self-Reported Strengths:
• Awareness of social and healthcare resources
• Higher education
• Level of community engagement
• Strong healthcare system
• Increasing enrollment in Medicaid
• Services to populations in need.
Alachua County Community Health Assessment (2024) Self-Reported Challenges:
• Insurance coverage and access
• High rates of mental health challenges and care access
• Public transit
• Food insecurity
• Chronic illness
• Lack of health information and service accessibility
161
2025-910A
Additionally, respondents expressed concern with the underutilization of preventative
healthcare as well as low rates of screening and vaccination. Black residents reported higher
rates of hypertension than all other racial groups. Hispanic residents reported higher rates of
diabetes than non-Hispanic residents. It was noted that East Gainesville and rural county areas
face unique barriers in accessing health and assistance resources due to differential barriers
from other parts of the county.
Other pertinent data from the Community Health Assessment includes:
• Poverty in Alachua County is higher than the state average (FL Health Charts, 2003,
2022).
• Alachua County respondents (women only) reported that 59.0 percent received a
mammogram (breast cancer screening), and 49.0 percent received a pap smear
(cervical cancer screening). Both rates are lower than the statewide rates of 81.4 percent
for mammograms (per FDOH; 2019) and 77.5 percent for cervical cancer screening
(UnitedHealth Foundation, 2020).
• Most residents (70.0 percent) reported difficulties accessing at least one health care
service.
• The county’s old-age dependency ratio has increased to 21.7 in 2022. A rising old-age
dependency ratio indicates a growing population of retirement-age adults, and an
increasing demand on working-age adults to support this group.
This information underscores the need for tailored interventions to reach specific groups across
the community, with socio-economic status and access as key considerations.
162
2025-910A
Progress to Build On
The City of Gainesville currently manages multiple initiatives to support neighbors leading
healthy lives. Many of them are included below:
Gainesville Fire Rescue
• Gainesville Fire Rescue’s Community Resource Paramedicine Program identifies
neighbors who frequently rely on emergency medical services and provides ongoing
support to reach positive health outcomes and improve quality of life. The program
connects individuals to primary care, provides mobile integrated health, medical
support and education, and collaborates with community-based organizations to
provide social resources like food, clothing, and financial assistance. The program has
grown to include response to substance use and homeless outreach and prevention.
• Gainesville Fire Rescue (GFR) implements programs to provide child safety seats at a
reduced cost, along with training and support to ensure the seats are installed properly,
and to supply and install smoke alarms for households who could not otherwise afford
this equipment. Many of these efforts are underfunded and require additional resources
to continue supporting the community.
• The Community Health Division also leads efforts in substance use prevention and
education. The Medication Assisted Treatment (MAT) program supports individuals
struggling with opioid use disorder by combining medication with facilitated connections
to counseling and behavioral therapies. We offer pathways to recovery and work closely
with healthcare providers and treatment centers to ensure seamless care. We support
local efforts to combat opioid misuse and substance use through education, harm
reduction strategies, and community partnerships. Our initiatives aim to save lives,
reduce stigma and promote recovery.
• Through the city’s gun violence prevention initiative, IMPACT GNV, Gainesville takes a
public health approach to gun violence, focusing on root causes and community-driven
solutions. Through data analysis, education, and partnerships, we work to reduce
violence and support those impacted by it. This includes the BOLD Program helping
individuals get connected to education and training opportunities as well as violence
interruption. The Community FIRST effort elevates a mobile city hall concept, making city
resources more accessible to historically underserved neighborhoods.
• Community education around CPR, overdose prevention and naloxone, mental health,
and Stop the Bleed are also components of this work. We offer health education
programs on topics ranging from chronic disease prevention to mental health
awareness, always tailored to the unique needs of our diverse neighborhoods .
Gainesville Police Department
163
2025-910A
• The Gainesville Police Department has four Co-Responder Teams supporting the
community. These teams consist of two full-time staff – a Crisis Intervention Trained
Police Officer and a master’s level mental health clinician from Meridian Behavioral
Healthcare. The team rides in a marked police vehicle to respond to calls involving
persons with mental illness, in substance use or mental health crisis, or emotionally
charged situations. The program connects individuals to appropriate treatment and
resources in need with treatment, diverting them from the criminal justice system.
• The Gainesville Police Department is responsible for coordinating and establishing the
intake procedures for the Special Events Permitting Process. Events help to build a sense
of belonging and community and the city aims to promote these while ensuring as afe
and accessible event for the community members. Multiple city departments provide
input review, collaborate, and use their specific industry knowledge, past experience,
and current code requirements (like life safety, local and state code requirements,
environment concerns, and crowd control factors) are met and that the location and
facilities selected are able to support the needs of the event.
Parks, Recreation, and Cultural Affairs Department
• Community Gardens are neighborhood green spaces set aside for residents to grow
vegetables for their own consumption, who otherwise might not be able to. The City of
Gainesville began its first Community Gardens Project at Southeast Fourth Avenue in
1998. Since that time, the program has grown to five gardens around Gainesville through
the joint efforts of the City of Gainesville's Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs
Department and the dedicated efforts of the residents of Gainesville.
• Edible groves are small clusters of fruit and nut trees planted in public parks to increase
access to healthy food, particularly in communities with limited food resources. Edible
Groves are small orchards of fruit and nut trees in public parks – in order to bring
healthy food into some of our most vulnerable communities.N eighbors are encouraged
to stroll through the groves and to pick food from the trees to eat. These initiatives help
bring health and wellness to our neighbors, yet many are underfunded and require
additional resources to continue supporting the community
• The City of Gainesville’s park system currently manages more than 3,200 acres of natural
space and many more acres of active recreation space and facilities providing access to
cultural, recreational, and natural areas that offer a variety of enriching experiences.
Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs has continuously implemented scholarships and
reduced rates to ensure many programs offered are free or considerably affordable. All
youth, senior, and special populations programs and resources are exempt from
additional surcharges and have reduced fees to support these efforts. Additionally,
efforts have been made to ensure that low-income families have free access to the City’s
afterschool care programs through subsidizing the programs.
164
2025-910A
• The Youth Services and Education division hosts a number of programs and camps
focused on education, enrichment and wellbeing. This includes afterschool, out of
school days, field trips, and arts programs. Many of these efforts embed emotional
wellbeing and holistic prevention methodologies to enhance positive youth
development. The WhyTry curriculum is also implemented in specific program. WhyTry
powerful enrichment tool designed to instill resilience in youth. It uses interactive
lessons to teach important principles to students in a way they can understand and use
in their daily lives. Engagement in WhyTry activities and lessons equips young minds with
the skills to overcome obstacles, manage emotions, and make positive choices.
• PRCA boasts multiple recreation opportunities like pools with aquatics programs, youth
and adult athletics, a golf course, and multiple wellness centers available to neighbors
across the city.
Gainesville Community Reinvestment Agency (GCRA)
• The GCRA offers a variety of incentive programs designed to encourage neighborhood
preservation, economic development, and community partnerships within the outlined
district. With additional funding, these programs can help serve underserved parts of
the eastern Gainesville area through business improvement services, downtown events,
community partnerships, and other opportunities. Additionally, these programs can
assist with promoting safe buildings and commercial areas, providing more
opportunities for community engagement, and encourage more active participation by
the community in providing help and aid to each other.
• Through various initiatives, the GCRA highlights programs centered around Downtown
Gainesville to aid with promoting community safety, providing knowledge and helpful
navigation, and help ensure a thriving downtown community space.
Department of Transportation
• Vision Zero - The main goal of a Vision Zero Action Strategy is to eliminate traffic
fatalities and serious injuries, while increasing safe mobility for all neighbors. The
strategy will focus initially on a defined core area to prioritize serving primarily
vulnerable road users. Building on initial efforts, the application of strategies will expand
to include appropriate measures in other areas of the City.
• Free Fare Program - Individuals 18 years of age and under, as well as those 65 and over,
are eligible to ride the City of Gainesville’s Regional Transit System (RTS) fixed-routes for
free if able to meet program qualifications. State issued photo ID required. This initiative
aims to reduce barriers to accessing the public transportation system.
165
2025-910A
What’s At Stake
Ensuring access to health opportunities for all should be the cornerstone of the Gainesville
community; controllable factors beyond an individual’s influence should not be a predictor of
whether they can lead healthy, quality lives. Furthermore, timely action is critical for health and
wellbeing, as establishing early preventative care can immediately produce measurable
improvements in health outcomes.
The City should take action, invest resources, and engage the community to address the stark
health disparities within Gainesville. This includes not only healthcare access, but economic
development, positive public spaces, quality educational opportunities, and community
support. The City can achieve better outcomes rather than wait until a person’s circumstances
have resulted in no other choice but to seek unaffordable emergency care.
Through ImagineGNV, the City will focus on improving the health and wellbeing of all people in
Gainesville with respect to culturally appropriate and affordable healthcare, access to
nutritious food, physical activity, mental health care, and recreation. This will be done through a
deliberate focus on addressing the social determinants of health to improve the lives of those
most in need, including people experiencing health disparities, low-income neighbors,
immigrant neighbors and those experiencing homelessness.
166
2025-910A
Our Health and Wellbeing Section
Goal 1: All people in Gainesville will have improved physical
health through policy and programming focused on increasing
access, preventive care, and building partnerships.
Improving physical health across the population requires a multifaceted approach that
addresses the root causes and barriers to well-being. This comprehensive plan centers on three
critical pillars: chronic disease prevention and management, improving access to healthcare,
promotion of physical activity and healthy nutrition as a public health priority. Together, these
elements form a holistic framework to reduce health disparities, improve quality of life, and
enhance community resilience.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Chronic disease incidence (Diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, cancer, etc.)
• Chronic disease mortality
• Obesity incidence
• Percent of population with a primary care physician
167
2025-910A
• Distance to health care facilities
• Enrollment in city-hosted sports programming
• Quantity of partnerships with community programs
Objective 1.1 – Increase the a vailability and affordability of healthy activities,
quality foods, medical care, and preventive screenings.
Policy 1.1.1 Continue to offer support for community gardens through the City’s Community
Garden Program.
Policy 1.1.2 and lLeverage support from gardening, healthy food access and nutrition
improvement programs offered by other local agencies that target low-income
and populations at high-risk for health disparity for programs promoting
gardening, healthy food access and nutrition improvement.
Policy 1.1.32 Create new marketing collateral and utilize online tools to bring awareness to
programs that are offered. Collateral may include: a seasonal guide, updated
park maps, social media content, fliers, posters, etc.
Policy 1.1.43 Support programs that incentivize and/or assist neighbors with gaining access to
healthy foods, such as Produce Prescription Programs and Fresh Access Bucks.
Policy 1.1.54 Increase medical and dental care provision in areas historically underserved by
healthcare services, including specialty clinics.
Policy 1.1.65 Coordinate with service providers to promote and support dental health
programs for children, youth, working-age adults and seniors.
Policy 1.1.76 Implement messaging that informs neighbors about the importance of
preventative healthcare and opportunities to access health services including
mobile connectors or those serving people without insurance or low-income
communities.
Policy 1.1.87 Ensure safe, convenient, and attractive physical health programming is available
for all ability levels and ages.
Policy 1.1.98 Coordinate with Regional Transit System (RTS) to facilitate increased transit
options to parks, food options, medical care, and activities.
Policy 1.1.109 Increase education on chronic illness and management techniques to individuals
with high risk factors.
Objective 1.2 – Develop and implement city services reflective of best
practices in physical health and safety and informed by relevant local and
national data.
Policy 1.2.1 Utilize data available from City sources and partners to identify physical health
needs as they arise throughout the community.
168
2025-910A
Policy 1.2.2 Encourage edible landscaping and gardens (i.e., fruit trees and shrubs) through
appropriate policy and standards in the Land Development Code.
Policy 1.2.3 Promote food security and public health by encouraging locally-based food
production, distribution, and choice in accordance with the Land Development
Code.
Policy 1.2.4 Consider programs to encourage property owners to make use of vacant
properties as community gardens and planting home gardens and other food
producing plants on their property.
Policy 1.2.5 Provide opportunities for everyone in Gainesville to participate in sports and
physical activity through structured programming and open time in facilities.
Policy 1.2.6 Promote safe routes to school and active transportation options.
Policy 1.2.7 Improve neighbors’ healthcare access through tailored programs for different
groups.
Policy 1.2.8 Expand affordable access to healthcare for low-income neighbors through mobile
health outreach efforts.
Policy 1.2.9 Develop and implement health education campaigns grounded in theory and
data to support participation in physical activity, healthy eating, healthcare
screenings, and chronic disease prevention.
Policy 1.2.10 Support programs and efforts that aim to address obesity disparities, as well as
related chronic disease disparities.
Objective 1.3 – Create and foster multi -sector partnerships to leverage
resources, subject matter expertise, and reach to support positive,
community-wide physical health outcomes.
Policy 1.3.1 Collaborate with UF Health and HCA Healthcare to improve healthcare access.
Policy 1.3.2 Work with trusted community organizations and city initiatives to create
improved access to health care for all.
Policy 1.3.3 Encourage public and private efforts that support culturally diverse food
opportunities, including grocery stores, farmers markets, food banks and
nutrition programs, especially to meet the nutritional needs of infants, children,
elders, and other vulnerable populations in their neighborhoods.
Policy 1.3.4 Support food banks, pantries, and other sources that provide food assistance to
low-income neighbors to increase access, purchasing of, and intake of fresh
fruits, vegetables, and other nutritious foods.
Policy 1.3.5 Partner with local higher education institutions (e.g., University of Florida, Santa
Fe College) to ensure accessibility to health-promoting programs without
169
2025-910A
associated costs and tailor these programs and amenities to the needs of
surrounding neighborhoods.
Policy 1.3.6 Pursue funding in partnership with other organizations to ensure evidence-based
health promotion and related programs are carried out at the community level.
Policy 1.3.7 Organize city health fairs or other health-promoting events to provide neighbors
with opportunities to connect with community and university resources,
programs, or events.
Policy 1.3.8 Prioritize partnerships with programs focusing on the prevention of cancer,
improving cancer survivorship, or those addressing major risk factors for cancer,
such as the Health-Smart Behavior Program™.
170
2025-910A
Goal 2: All people in Gainesville will have improved behavioral
health through expanding education, reducing stigma,
collaboration, and access to care.
Promoting mental wellness and addressing substance use are essential components of a
thriving, resilient city. As communities continue to face rising rates of mental health challenges
and substance use disorders, it is imperative to take a proactive, compassionate, and evidence-
based approach. This comprehensive plan focuses on four key strategies: expanding education,
reducing stigma, strengthening connections to care, and improving access to mental health and
substance use services.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Diversions from jail to mental health or healthcare professionals
• Rates of overdose/poisoning and mental health-related EMS calls
• Community members trained in mental health or substance use knowledge and/or skills
• Enrollment in city-partnered mental health programs
• Rates of suicide
• Measures of depression, stress, etc.
Objective 2.1 – Improve access to affordable, culturally -competent mental
health and substance use services by developing partnerships with healthcare
providers, community organizations, and businesses to reduce stigma
surrounding behavioral health challenges.
Policy 2.1.1 Create citywide public education campaigns to promote mental wellness, explain
the signs and symptoms of mental health and substance use disorders, and share
resources.
Policy 2.1.2 Train frontline workers, community members, and health/social service
organizations in Mental Health First Aid and other support techniques for youth,
seniors, and other populations to better guide individuals to services.
Policy 2.1.3 Support mobile substance use services and mental health resources that extend
into areas of the community historically underserved.
Policy 2.1.4 Increase crisis intervention and stabilization resources in areas historically
underserved by healthcare services.
Policy 2.1.5 Promote culturally sensitive education and messaging to reduce stigma towards
seeking mental health resources, especially in underserved and minority
communities.
171
2025-910A
Policy 2.1.6 Include perspectives of those with lived experience in the planning and
implementation of health-related policies and programs to reduce stigma around
behavioral health challenges.
Objective 2.2 – Utilize best practices in health promotion to support mental
health education, outreach, and treatment within City services.
Policy 2.2.1 Utilize data available from City sources and partners to identify physical health
needs as they arise throughout the community.
Policy 2.2.2 Offer programming with embedded emotional wellbeing practices for community
members of all ages – to include the arts, sports, and technology.
Policy 2.2.3 Expand crisis intervention services, including mobile response teams and co-
responder models, that pair mental health professionals with first responders.
Policy 2.2.4 Provide training and education for educators, employers, public servants, and
community members on trauma-informed practices, suicide prevention, and
overdose response.
Policy 2.2.5 Expand telehealth services and peer support networks within city networks
and services.
Policy 2.2.6 Encourage and support smoke-free parks and recreational areas.
Policy 2.2.7 Support the elimination of the sale and distribution of mentholated cigarettes
and other flavored tobacco including electronic nicotine delivery products.
Policy 2.2.8 Address parental stress by increasing education on management strategies and
partnering with programs related to parental stress.
Objective 2.3 – Build partnerships and foster support for a person -centered,
community-based approach to mental health and substance use care.
Policy 2.3.1 Pursue funding opportunities and grant partnerships to support increased
provision of mental health and substance use services and education.
Policy 2.3.2 Build partnerships with youth-serving organizations and faith-based groups to
expand community knowledge and reduce misinformation around mental health
and substance abuse.
Policy 2.3.3 Create and implement a coordinated referral system across city services,
schools, healthcare providers, law enforcement, and social services to ensure
smooth transitions to appropriate care.
Policy 2.3.4 Partner with trusted community organizations and direct service providers,
including mental healthcare clinics and academic programs to strengthen
messaging for vulnerable communities.
172
2025-910A
Policy 2.3.5 Support behavioral health programs for neighbors who have been impacted by
the criminal justice system in order to break the cycle of recidivism.
Policy 2.3.6 Partner with agencies and community organizations for prevention, education,
harm reduction, and treatment programs to reduce substance misuse in
neighborhoods and workplaces.
Policy 2.3.7 Facilitate educational opportunities with community organizations, leaders, and
partners to identify opportunities for reducing tobacco usage.
173
2025-910A
Goal 3: All people in Gainesville will have improved social
health through fostering a safe, connected community where
all residents feel a sense of safety and belonging, have access to
support and resources, and can participate fully in civic and
social life.
Social health is a foundational pillar of a thriving, vibrant city. It encompasses the quality of
relationships, the strength of community connections, and the ability of individuals to access
support, feel safe, and participate fully in civic life. Social well-being is not only critical to
individual and community resilience – it also directly influences mental, physical, and economic
health outcomes. This comprehensive plan prioritizes violence prevention, community
connectedness, awareness of local resources, and inclusive systems that promote dignity, trust,
and opportunity for all.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Rates of persons shot or injured by gun fire
• Number# of shots fired
• Number# of active community advisory boards
• Engagement metrics on the city’s website
• Number# of special events hosted
• Number# of requests through the MyGNV App
• Number# of neighborhood watch meetings
• Unemployment rate
• Measures of social well-being and belonging
Objective 3.1 – Broaden access to social support systems, public spaces, civic
engagement opportunities, and essential resources that promote social
connection and well -being.
Policy 3.1.1 Promote the utilization of myGNV to report concerns and inquiries to city
government.
Policy 3.1.2 Utilize a mobile city hall concept to foster meaningful relationships with
communities historically underserved by city resources.
Policy 3.1.3 Identify creative channels to share ways to engage with city government, such as
advisory board openings, commission meetings, “ask the city”, events, and
others.
Policy 3.1.4 Review data and trends to identify areas most impacted by safety concerns to
deploy resources appropriately.
174
2025-910A
Policy 3.1.5 Reduce challenges associated with transportation to increase neighbor
engagement through assistance programs and route navigation strategies.
Policy 3.1.6 Promote the co-location of health and social services to reduce barriers to
access.
Policy 3.1.7 Develop an increased level of emergency preparedness among all segments of
the population to help coordinate governmental response and recovery efforts
that seek to minimize the impacts of an emergency or disaster.
Objective 3.2 – Ensure that city services and programs are informed by
evidence-based and community -driven best practices that promote social
well-being, reduce isolation, and strengthen trust, inclusion, and safety across
all neighborhoods.
Policy 3.2.1 Utilize data available from City sources and partners to identify social needs as
they arise throughout the community.
Policy 3.2.2 Conduct strategic outreach to neighbors for their feedback when creating needs
assessments, determining programmatic priorities, and designing new amenities.
Policy 3.2.3 Enhance efforts to reach impacted groups with town halls and strategic planning
sessions.
Policy 3.2.4 Offer fire and life safety education to the community by bringing fire prevention,
emergency preparedness education and resources directly to community groups.
Policy 3.2.5 Focus on protection of life and property through prevention efforts like car seat
checks and installations and smoke alarm installations.
Policy 3.2.6 Increase the number of certified Car Seat Technicians in the community.
Policy 3.2.7 Provide supports to assist neighbors in navigating educational resources, career
training, and job opportunities through case management.
Policy 3.2.8 Incorporate CPTED (Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design) principles
in designing new city spaces or renovating existing ones.
Policy 3.2.9 Develop a tracking system and community health indicators designed to measure
the city’s progress toward holistic community health. This data should include
information about locations to ensure services are delivered in areas most in
need.
Policy 3.2.10 Utilize community health indicators to inform mid-term and long-term budgetary
decision-making. Recognize the importance of city services to local community
character by planning for and integrating public safety and health into short- and
long-term planning.
175
2025-910A
Policy 3.2.11 Provide supports and resources that assist with conflict mediation, de-
escalation, and healthy relationships in the community.
Policy 3.2.12 Foster community-led violence prevention strategies that center restorative
justice, conflict resolution, and trauma-informed approaches.
Policy 3.2.13 Implement data-informed strategies to address domestic violence, gun violence,
and hate crimes, with a focus on protecting vulnerable populations.
Policy 3.2.14 Continue to support community centers, neighborhood associations, and social
hubs that bring people together across generations and backgrounds.
Policy 3.2.15 Pursue funding or grants for programs that strengthen intergenerational bonds,
civic engagement, and local leadership—particularly in historically underserved
communities.
Objective 3.3 – Foster and sustain cross -sector partnerships with community
organizations, faith -based groups, schools, healthcare providers, and
residents to build a coordinated network of support that promotes social
connectedness, safety, and access to essential servic es.
Policy 3.3.1 Promote coordination among local health systems and entities to include
national, state, and local health programs and the local provision of health
services, such as safety net providers.
Policy 3.3.2 Develop and participate in ongoing channels for cross-department collaboration
including task forces, training, formal and ad-hoc working groups to support
community wellbeing.
Policy 3.3.3 Coordinate with institutions to convene stakeholders to formulate strategic local
efforts around gun violence prevention.
Policy 3.3.4 Pursue funding or grants to support youth programs, mentorship, and safe
spaces to address root causes of violence and provide positive alternatives.
Policy 3.3.5 Support local networks that foster peer support, mutual aid, and volunteerism.
Policy 3.3.6 Encourage collaborative decision-making and community-driven planning to
build long-term trust and accountability between residents and institutions.
Policy 3.3.7 Create public education campaigns focused on roadway safety, especially for
high-risk groups such as older adults, new drivers, and non-motorized road
users.
Policy 3.3.8 Increase coordination across public health agencies, healthcare providers, and
social services to address social determinants such as food security and
environmental exposures.
176
2025-910A
Policy 3.3.9 Encourage collaboration between existing partners, prioritize funding initiatives,
and organize community resources to intervene for vulnerable individuals to
create a comprehensive safety net.
177
2025-910A
Recreation and Open Space Section
Goal 4: All people in Gainesville will have access to quality park
space, facilities, recreation programs, and environmentally
significant open space.
Members of the Gainesville community appreciate and place a strong value on accessible and
well-maintained open space, park systems, and environmentally significant natural areas. These
places serve as invaluable assets to our City’s quality of life and positively impact the health and
wellbeing of both Gainesville residents and visitors from surrounding communities. They provide
opportunities for active and passive recreation, support our local ecosystem and aquifers, and
help reduce pollution.
As the City expands, natural areas need to be preserved, maintained, and continue to serve as
resources to all neighbors to enjoy nature close to home. Currently, neighbors with higher
incomes and more resources are better able to access natural areas. To reduce this disparity,
the City will continue to make natural areas accessible to all residents regardless of who they
are and where they live.
178
2025-910A
Additionally, engagement processes that are inclusive of the visitors of the city’s parks and
amenities and accurately source their needs is critical to ensuring that neighbors of all identities
have a sense of belonging at the city’s parks. To do so, PRCA will develop systems for creating a
robust feedback process for new projects.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Visitors’ satisfaction levels, sense of safety, perception toward park quality/upkeep, etc.
at parks
• Percentage% of residents who can access parks within a 10-minute walking distance
• Park acreage per 1,000 residents
• Percentage% of residents who have access to nature trails or multi-use trails within a
10-minute walking distance
• Percentage% of nature trails and multi-use trails meeting ADA standards
• Attendance at public open houses that inform the design of new amenities
Objective 4.1 – Use data-driven processes, community engagement , and
inventory assessments to create a more inclusive and welcoming park system.
Policy 4.1.1 Consider the quantity, quality, and accessibility of existing parks in a
neighborhood when prioritizing funding for the construction and maintenance of
parks and amenities. PRCA will continue to fund new parks with the goal of
ensuring all people in Gainesville have a park within a 10-minute walk from their
homes. Priority actions include:
a. Account for both the accessibility of parks and the quality of these parks and
amenities in a neighborhood when identifying new areas for park
development or areas that are due for renovation. This will ensure that
historically low-income neighborhoods are prioritized to receive new and/or
renovated and well-maintained facilities.
b. Account for both City-owned and non-City parks. As the City expands
westward, West Gainesville has seen many newer private or non-profit
recreational amenities developed to serve new residents. PRCA will use the
community services inventory to identify private or non-profit amenities to
account for different types of spaces. By taking these non-City investments
into consideration, PRCA will direct City resources to ensure that high-quality
parks are accessible to all.
c. PRCA will continue to update the Vision 2020 Master Plan needs assessment
on a periodic basis to remain current with the needs of the community, to
determine where investment in new or renovated park infrastructure needs to
be focused, and to support the City’s strategic initiatives.
179
2025-910A
Policy 4.1.2 Purchase additional land or use City-owned property for new park development.
As the footprint and populations of Gainesville grows, additional land and parks
will need to be added to ensure we maintain a quality percentage of park acreage
per population levels. Priority actions include:
a. PRCA will use currently owned properties or purchase undeveloped lands for
new park development. Utilizing currently owned lands can make best use of
unused lands without a need to displace residents or other uses important to
neighborhoods.
b. PRCA will plan land purchases based on land acquisition priorities that
consider a site’s ecological significance, connectivity to other conservation
areas, proximity to other existing parks, potential to create recreational
opportunities for neighbors, and archaeological and cultural value.
c. PRCA will evaluate future operation and maintenance resource needs for land
acquisition to determine the feasibility and sustainability of new additions.
Policy 4.1.3 Offer varied and affordable programs for residents of all identities and increase
awareness of available programs and amenities. PRCA will offer programs that
are tailored to each community and create a sense of belonging at each of the
city’s parks. Priority actions include:
a. PRCA will utilize community engagement and the needs assessment update
to guide programs offered by centering the voices of those who may utilize
the programs.
b. PRCA will partner with local educational institutions such as the University of
Florida, Santa Fe College, and the School Board of Alachua County, as well as
other private and non-profit organizations across the city. Through these
partnerships, PRCA will ensure accessibility to these programs through
minimizing participation fees and tailoring programs and amenities to the
needs of surrounding neighborhoods.
Policy 4.1.4 Incentivize private developers to contribute to park development. Incentives,
partnerships, or sponsorships act as an opportunity for the City and private
developers to work together in developments that mutually benefit each other
while providing increased availability and quality of parks, open spaces, and
facilities.
Policy 4.1.5 Establish open space and multi-use trail systems throughout the City, with a
focus on locations where they are less accessible. Open space and multi-use trail
systems provide ways for neighbors to walk, jog, bike, and enjoy nature away
from vehicular traffic across the City. PRCA will work with the Department of
Transportation to plan and establish open space and multi-use trail systems.
Priority actions include:
180
2025-910A
a. Prioritize establishing natural areas in more urban areas and areas near
historically lower-income areas of Gainesville and where residents have less
transit access.
b. Ensure that natural areas conform to the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990 and all applicable laws and codes when feasible given the environment.
c. Use abandoned railroad rights-of-way, utility rights-of-way, and creek beds
to link residential, commercial, and industrial locations similar to the City’s
road network.
d. Continue to ensure new developments and amenities will provide the best
and most appropriate use based on land acquisition policies prior to
development.
e. PRCA will evaluate future operation and maintenance resource needs for
open space and multi-use trails to determine the feasibility and sustainability
of new additions.
Policy 4.1.6 Work with the Urban Forestry Management Plan and the GCRA to plant shade
trees within city parks and along multi-use trails. Planting shade trees in park
spaces and along multi-use trails will reduce pollution, increase vibrancy of
neighborhoods, and support reduction of extreme environmental impacts such
as heat, excessive water runoff, and improved air quality. Priority actions include:
a. Identify areas within parks and along multi-use trails where additional shade
trees would be beneficial.
b. Identify aging shade trees that need replacement.
c. Work with Urban Forestry and GCRA to fund and support shade tree additions
and replacements
Policy 4.1.7 Conduct inclusive engagement that invites neighbors to participate in decision-
making over parks. Priority actions include:
a. Launch “Community Program Proposal Day,” a process to solicit neighbors’
ideas for recreational programming. This will ensure that neighbors and
community organizations can voice their ideas for recreational programs and
receive support with implementation in the form of funding, administrative
support, and partnerships. PRCA will develop an evaluation rubric to ensure
that successful proposals address existing concerns in the community and
represent community needs.
b. Conduct outreach to residents when creating needs assessments,
determining program priorities, designing new parks and amenities. The
success of programming and design depends on meeting the needs of
residents and ensuring that users inform the design. PRCA will always
181
2025-910A
conduct community engagement when determining citywide priorities or
designing individual amenities, to ensure that PRCA’s decisions reflect
resident feedback.
c. For new developments, PRCA will conduct outreach from the conceptual
stages through the design process of new park developments, ensure they
are collaborative, and provide for multiple forms of participation to ensure
that they are accessible to all. In parallel,
b.d. PRCA will conduct ongoing engagement and communications of
recreational programming information through publications, workshops, and
media exposure.
Policy 4.1.8 Review and update park standards on a periodic basis to ensure that they meet
the needs of the community, are inclusive and support a sense of belonging. Park
standards for equipment, furnishings and signage require frequent updating. By
evaluating the standards, checking them against current trends, and
understanding community to global access needs park systems can meet the
needs of more in their community than they had previously. Priority actions
include:
a. Ensure that equipment and furnishing standards do not create barriers for
the Gainesville community. Review standards for multi-generational, and all
abilities to provide the basics for inclusion in park spaces.
b. Ensure that sign standards do not create barriers for the Gainesville
community in accessing park spaces. Check for readability, multi-lingual,
icon graphics, and other elements that provide multiple ways for the
community to engage with park spaces.
c. Ensure that standards meet all ADA requirements.
182
2025-910A
183
How We Work
2025-910A
How We Work
Where we are and how we got here
The City of Gainesville is supported by a diversity of industries that provides a broad range of
economic opportunity that can benefit residents across all backgrounds. In order to connect
people to opportunity, it’s important that our plans for the future consider the circumstances
and context that enable or hinder our residents from participation and inclusion. This chapter
includes goals, objectives, and policies that support the city’s evolving economic landscape,
including the physical and social infrastructure that helps communities thrive.
Economic development connects the most valuable pieces of our city to our ability to grow.
Both where you are and who you are determine access to valuable services and industry, and
therefore access to economic opportunity. This section will outline inclusive growth strategies
that help to broaden the scope of economic effects to reach the most people, and the people
that have historically been left out of the conversation. Some of the goals of these strategies are
job creation, amplifying existing industry and commercial clusters, workforce development
(preparing people to take advantage of opportunity), entrepreneurship and small business
support.
The institutions that bolster our city provide benefits in the form of a strong knowledge-based
economy, but those benefits are not always evenly distributed. Despite a highly educated
workforce, those without the benefit of higher education, or who don’th ave access to higher
education, are often left out of the equation. Many find themselves lacking resources and
support services that aren’t available elsewhere – those like social connections, training and
certifications, or support services (mental health, counseling, peer support, childcare,
transportation.) It is therefore imperative that economic development programs initiated by the
City direct their efforts toward neighborhoods where investment has historically been lower,
and identify and support organizations who work to educate, train, and employ all of our
neighbors, from all walks of life.
While access to resources like jobs and workforce training, education, and related services are
imperative to the economic wellbeing of a city, so too are civic functions like community
engagement, entertainment, recreation and broad-ranging activities. Across Gainesville, the
local economy is supported by forms of place-based cultural and social organizations that
complement traditional economic industries. These include a wide array of community-scale
economic activities – such as temporary markets, market fairs, live performances, pop-up
retail, and public art initiatives – that serve as both economic catalysts and social anchors.
While often decentralized and led by grassroots organizers, these activities represent a growing
share of the informal and creative economy, supporting microenterprise, hospitality, and
cultural entrepreneurship.
184
2025-910A
These activities are shaped by participation, creativity, and the reuse of public and underutilized
private spaces. They generate local value by encouraging foot traffic, incubating new business
ventures, and creating low-barrier entry points for new entrepreneurs. Cultural-economic
activities like these play an intersectional role between inclusive economic development and
urban placemaking. Support for this type of economic intersectionality means highlighting the
importance of economic assets such as public space, cultural programming, and neighborhood-
based organizing as legitimate contributors to a city's economic health.
In Gainesville, who you are impacts your ability to find a job, your income, and the support you
receive to grow your business. These disparities can be traced back to historic actions by the
Federal, State, and City governments such as legal work discrimination, redlining, and racial
covenants, which limited job opportunities created segregated neighborhoods, hindered
homeownership, and prevented families from building generational wealth.
Over the next decade, the Gainesville Area Chamber of Commerce in coordination with other
partners in the community expect five sectors to represent a large share of new jobs in
Gainesville, especially jobs that pay a living wage and provide career growth opportunities
inclusive of Distribution and Trade, Business Support Services, Agriculture Science &
Technology, Human Life Sciences, and Digital Technology. To build an equitable economic
future, it is critical to broaden opportunities for employment and advancement in these
industries and to ensure that all people in Gainesville are prepared to enter and thrive in these
industries. The City will pursue this through thoughtful policies and partnerships to support
both individuals seeking to work in these industries and firms who are growing in these sectors.
185
2025-910A
Image Courtesy of Greater Gainesville Chamber of Commerce – COLLABORATE 2.0
Progress to build on
In the last 25 years, the City has successfully grown existing industries, incubated businesses in
new industries, and attracted businesses from outside the city. The tools at the City’s disposal
include: a former City Enterprise Zone Program that provides development incentives as well as
opportunities to develop City-owned real estate such as the Airport Industrial Park; capital and
funding support provided to the Gainesville Technology Enterprise Center, a facility designed to
nurture startups; participation with economic development partners in attracting outside
industries through the deployment of a local match to State and other incentives when
warranted; and a host of related programmatic efforts.
In addition to these City-led initiatives focused on East Gainesville, the City has partnered with
other stakeholders in the community to move economic development forward. Partners include
the Gainesville Community Redevelopment Reinvestment Area, University of Florida, Santa Fe
College, Gainesville Area Chamber of Commerce, Alachua County, and the Gainesville Regional
Airport, Gainesville-Alachua County Association of Realtors, and the Builder’s Association of
186
2025-910A
North Central Florida, all of whom provide a solid footing for community economic development
moving forward.
What’s at stake?
Moving forward, the priority for the City is to ensure the benefits of growth are shared by all
people in Gainesville and that no neighbor is left behind. Through using the tools available to
the City and partnering with institutions and organizations, the City will ensure that all
neighbors have what they need to earn a living, grow a business, and support their community’s
wellbeing.
187
2025-910A
Goal 1: All people in Gainesville will be able to secure a job that
enables them to support themselves and their families.
Achieving economic stability – for the individual and for their families – requires more than
access to employment or sufficient income. Long-term economic stability means the ability to
achieve economic mobility, which translates into wealth-building and intergenerational
stability. However, for many residents, these opportunities have been out of reach due to
persistent barriers linked to cycles of poverty, unequal access to education, and disinvestment
in certain communities. These conditions can limit upward mobility across generations,
reinforcing disparities in financial security and opportunity. The city will support efforts to
connect residents to living-wage employment, while also identifying resources and partnerships
that promote financial literacy, career mobility, and the skills needed to build long-term
economic security. This includes a deliberate focus on areas of the city where access to
opportunity has historically been limited.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Unemployment and labor force participation rates
• Wage rates compared to cost of living changes (Median wage, Average Private Sector
Wage)
188
2025-910A
• Percentage% of jobs that pay a living wage by industry
• Number of businesses providing training opportunities in terms of apprenticeships,
internships, etc. and number of neighbors attending these trainings.
• Number of neighbors participating in City/partner offered training programs
• Number of neighbors re-entering the work force that are able to find a job within 6
months
Objective 1.1 – Increase access to quality employment and training
opportunities citywide by removing structural barriers and partnering with
institutions to support workforce development, (especially in areas of
disinvestment.)
Policy 1.1.1 Encourage businesses in Gainesville to pay a living wage, providing necessary
support where needed. This includes:
a. Making fair and nondiscriminatory hiring, pay, and HR practices a
precondition of city contracting and public subsidies, in cases not prohibited
by law.
b. Incentivizing private businesses to increase pay and benefits through tax
benefits and prioritizing partnerships between the City and business entities
who pay living wages, in cases not prohibited by law.
Policy 1.1.2 Work with partners in the community to ensure that neighbors have access to
adequate job training and career development assistance. The city will partner
with institutions and organizations in the community, including Santa Fe College
and others, to make job training and career development pathways available
inclusively. This includes providing City space for job training and career
development forums, providing training and technical support in applying for
City contracts, and consider providing financial or technical support to
supplement existing partner programs. Furthermore, the City will work with
partners to:
a. Provide training for resume building, personal savings and investment and
paths to homeownership.
b. Offer training in venues (e.g., churches, schools, etc.) close to low-income
and communities with demonstrated gaps in income and employment
c. Offer training during accessible times (e.g. night classes)
d. Provide career training for High School students who choose to work after
graduation (e.g., apprenticeships, career exploration programs, technical
credits)
e. Conduct outreach to communities and make sure information about City
programs and application processes are easy to navigate for people without
higher education or internet access, etc.
189
2025-910A
f. Continue to implement the Fair Chance Hiring ordinance to support reentry
into the job market for people with criminal records
g. Create internships with the City to support future career interest in local
government and provide local government work experience.
Policy 1.1.3 Designate a City staff coordinator responsible for oversight of economic
development goals. This entity should conduct regular review, collect data, and
survey departments, citizens and other stakeholders to track progress toward
achieving the goals of this plan.
Objective 1.2 - Ensure that the City of Gainesville and its economic partners
model fair labor practices and enable residents to access, retain, and advance
through employment.
Policy 1.2.1 Ensure that the City as an organization is modeling the approach to equal
opportunity hiring and labor practices. The City organization will facilitate job
opportunities and advancement that assists neighbors in securing jobs that lead
to the ability to earn a living.
Policy 1.2.2 Ensure that businesses receiving City subsidies are required to model equal
opportunity pay, hiring practices, and provide workforce training opportunities.
The City will require incoming businesses receiving incentives to adhere to
standards for equitable workforce practices. The city will update standards for
incentives, potentially through the form of Community Benefits Agreements,
which may include, among others:
a. Local hiring requirements
b. Requirements for making paid internships available to Gainesville neighbors
c. Ensuring employers participate in programs that support re-entry for people
who have been impacted by the criminal justice system
Policy 1.2.3 Coordinate across City departments to monitor and track department-specific
economic development metrics. Identify programming implemented by city
departments that contribute toward economic progress and create a
collaborative report with corresponding strategies to improve upon each
departmental goal.
190
2025-910A
Goal 2: Gainesville will attract, support, and grow businesses,
prioritizing employers that pay a living wage and contribute to
a stronger local economy.
The city will support growth in identified sectors (healthcare, business management, sales,
education, office and administrative support, food preparation and service, life, physical and
social sciences, transportation and material moving, installation, maintenance and repair,
business and financial services, architecture/engineering, and community and social services)
and ensure that this growth benefits all neighbors, including neighborhoods that have received
less private investment. Developing a diverse business base in addition to the large public
employers in the community is crucial to providing a means of earning a living to the City’s
neighbors. At the same time, the city will address present and future infrastructure needs to
ensure long-term economic stability is feasible for a diversity of industries.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Number of employers by industry sector
191
2025-910A
• Analysis of available land/building inventory for economic development purposes (e.g.,
vacant buildings and sites)
• Analysis of infrastructure for economic development purposes (e.g., availability of
sanitary sewer/water, electricity, broadband)
• Analysis of growth in tax base based upon economic development (e.g., assessed value)
Objective 2.1 – Address present and future regulations, infrastructure, and
real estate needs of communities and neighborhoods to ensure long-term
economic stability is feasible for a diversity of industries.
Policy 2.1.1 Review the land development code and other pertinent City regulations, as well
as gaps in infrastructure (such as water, sewer, telecom, roads, etc.), available
land, and buildings that would hinder the growth of businesses in focus
industries. In the process, the City will conduct outreach to businesses that
range in ownership, size, industry, and customer base in order to capture
challenges experienced by businesses serving disadvantaged communities.
Policy 2.1.2 Identify opportunities to attract target employers to neighborhoods that lack
quality job opportunities. The City will incentivize businesses in target industries
to locate in areas of the city that lack living-wage jobs. This will include financial
incentives, utilizing city-owned land, and investing in real estate and
infrastructure to attract businesses, among others.
Policy 2.1.3 Identify gaps in skills/training among communities underrepresented in the
growth industries, then focus programs that fill these gaps. The City will review
the skills required to participate in the growing sectors identified above, assess
the current talent pool with a focus on communities with less access to high-
paying jobs, create strategies to address the mismatch in skills/training, and
then focus talent development efforts on those groups.
Policy 2.1.4 Conduct a study to create development incentives to facilitate attraction,
expansion, or retention of business. Currently, developers building properties
outside of the GCRA boundaries do not have access to GCRA incentives; the study
would design a robust approach to providing incentives Citywide.
Policy 2.1.5 Create a “business-readiness” profile for different areas of the City, and ensure
that each district is equipped to provide high-paying jobs in critical job markets
and industries. Highlight resources available to key industries that add long-term
economic value to neighborhoods and communities.
Policy 2.1.6 Provide continued implementation of the Enterprise Zone and create a report
detailing its impact. Provide recommendations to improve its efficacy and
consider its expansion or revision.
192
2025-910A
Goal 3: Small and minority business owners and entrepreneurs
will have the resources they need to launch, thrive, and grow.
Small, local businesses serve as cultural and economic institutions and are a critical part of the
city’s economic base. Small, local businesses also improve localized economies and provide
economic opportunity to a variety of participants. In recognition of the broad impact that these
organizations have on the City’s economic wellbeing, the city will assist by connecting business
owners to funding, organizational, administrative and educational assistance, and will make
efforts to prioritize businesses working to hire, assist, and train marginalized/minority groups.
The City will devote special effort to identify challenges that small, local and minority-/women-
owned businesses face and to tailor efforts that support them to thrive. The City will also strive
to meet the business community and their customers face-to-face via public outreach at major
events.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Number of small businesses
• Number of participants in small business development and entrepreneurial training
programs
• Number of participants in capital programs directed at small and minority businesses
193
2025-910A
• Number of engagements with small and minority businesses regarding doing business
with the City of Gainesville (e.g., attendance at City webinars)
• Number of participants in mentoring programs serving small and minority businesses
Objective 3.1 – Foster a business environment where all members of the
community have the opportunity and resources necessary to start and sustain
new businesses.
Policy 3.1.1 Partner with and support community organizations to provide training and
technical support for small, local businesses and minority-owned businesses.
The city will work with and provide support for organizations including Santa Fe
College Center for Innovation and Economic Development (CIED), UF Innovate,
SCORE, and the Small Business Development Center (SBDC), etc. to provide
support for small- and minority-owned businesses development. This may
include in-kind or financial assistance for organizational capacity building, or
marketing materials/City space to host trainings.
Policy 3.1.2 Ensure that the City’s procurement process is transparent and easily accessible
by the small, local and minority business community. The City will ensure that
procurement systems do not pose a barrier to entry for small businesses and
minority-owned businesses. This will entail:
a. Better sharing of information about how to navigate the procurement process
by using local media, engaging with various community groups, and providing
guidance in multiple languages.
b. Reviewing the existing procurement process to identify barriers to
participation for businesses with less resources or businesses that lack
access to financial institutions. This may include simplifying
permitting/licensing requirements for ease of application.
c. Through the procurement office, addressing financial management and
overhead concerns that prevent small businesses from taking on contracts
(e.g., high levels of insurance and bonding required for City contracts; long
payment windows).
Policy 3.1.3 Create a new business development kit packed with guides, forms, connections,
and other resources. Connect aspiring and current business owners to City-
owned and managed organizations, events, and personnel to facilitate growth
and networking opportunities. The city will identify opportunities to expedite and
facilitate permitting and application processes and will work to ensure that new
businesses are not hindered by a lack of adequate education and support
surrounding city rules, regulations and requirements.
194
2025-910A
Objective 3.2 – Identify and address obstacles that small, local businesses
encounter with accessing capital
Policy 3.2.1 Identify and address obstacles that small, local and minority-owned businesses
face in accessing capital. Access to capital is important to the health and
sustainability of small and minority-owned businesses as they grow and develop.
The city will create a plan of action to fill the gap. Examples include:
a. City guarantee for micro-credit loans to local community banks (Opportunity
Loan program)
b. Subsidizing retail space to lower the cost of entry (potentially use Community
Land Trusts)
c. Creating a “business improvement grant” that supports capital upgrades
Policy 3.2.2 Support non-brick & mortar businesses (e.g., food trucks, home-based
businesses) that could be points of entry into more permanent business
operations. Examples include:
a. Updating the current policies to minimize restrictions to operation
b. Providing coaching and support for owners to navigate permitting, licensing,
etc.
c. Creating an accessible information page for home occupations to include
relevant state statutes, funding sources and educational materials.
Objective 3.3 – Promote homegrown businesses by encouraging and
facilitating public -private partnership, business partnerships, and
by increasing access to City public platforms.
Policy 3.3.1 Identify opportunities to promote events hosted by local businesses via City-
managed platforms, like the City website or social media accounts.
Policy 3.3.2 Establish strategies to regularly connect relevant departments with private
businesses regarding upcoming events, and methods for those departments to
sponsor, promote, or assist the business.
Policy 3.3.32 Establish a hub to facilitate connections between local businesses to provide for
the sharing of resources, knowledge and mentorship. The City should identify
successful programs enacted by small businesses and sponsor businesses who
demonstrate success and enthusiasm in their efforts to improve Gainesville’s
local business economy.
195
2025-910A
196
How We Learn
2025-910A
How We Learn
Public Schools Facilities Section
Where we are and how we got here
Achieving high quality education is fundamental to making Gainesville a great place to live today
and in the future. Having high-quality education means that children can attend public schools
that offer learning environments that support them to thrive; high school students receive
skills-based training that prepares them to enter the job market; and adults can access
affordable job training opportunities; among other resources that are essential to lifelong
learning. These are all critical in ensuring that Gainesville thrives economically, improves public
health outcomes, promotes civic engagement, lowers crime, and continues to be the hub of
creativity and intellectual ability that it is today.
In 1954, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka that education
be made available to all on equal terms. Although many advances have resulted from this
landmark decision, today, who you are and where you live can still affect the quality of
education you receive. These disparities stem from historic actions and inactions taken at the
Federal, State, and Local levels that have harmed communities and have impacted children’s
education. Furthermore, the impact continues to be felt through systems such as public school
siting, districting, and zoning.
As the City of Gainesville aspires for high-quality education for all residents, effective
partnership with non-City organizations is critical. To proactively assess and monitor school
performance, the City must work with ACPSAlachua County Public Schools, which collects and
maintains data on student demographics, socioeconomics, and school performance. Education
in Gainesville is also supported by a number of other government entities, academic
institutions, and nonprofits whose efforts are important to achieving more equitable outcomes.
Other primary and secondary educational facilities include charter schools, private schools,
centers that serve students with special needs, and a lab school that operates under the control
of the State university system. Public postsecondary educational institutions include the
University of Florida, the teaching hospital, UF Health Shands Hospital, and Santa Fe College.
Non-profit organizations that partner with United Way also provide educational services and job
training within the City.
Progress to build on
The City currently works to ensure all Gainesville residents have access to quality education in
several ways. Through the Interlocal Agreement for Public School Facility Planning (ILA), the City
of Gainesville meets annually with the School Board of Alachua County (SBAC), Alachua County,
197
2025-910A
and other municipalities in the County to coordinate land use and public school facilities
planning. Furthermore, through systems such as the school concurrency requirements –
regulations that control the impact of new development on school capacity – the City ensures
that new development does not cause school overcrowding. In addition, the City of Gainesville
coordinates with the National Recreation and Park Association (NRPA) to increase nutrition
awareness and physical fitness among children in grades 1 through 8; award full scholarships for
free or reduced lunch through programs for the ACPS system; and offer community education
classes, nature preschool programs, and weekend and summer programs.
What’s at stake?
Addressing inequities in education for the generations of today will create a more prosperous
society for the generations of tomorrow. A Gainesville where young people can achieve their full
potential ensures that the city is maximizing its talent, which can lead to new businesses being
started, a more skilled workforce, a more engaged public, and healthier and happier families.
Investing in all students so that they have what they need to thrive unlocks that potential for the
benefit of individuals as well as the broader community. The strategies included in ImagineGNV
build on existing systems the City developed to provide access to quality education while
introducing new approaches and placing emphasis on communities with educational gaps.
198
2025-910A
Public Schools Facilities Section
Goal 1: Gainesville will be a source of quality public education
and schools that are available to benefit all residents in the
surrounding community.
Gainesville residents should have access to quality public education regardless of who they are
or where they live. As a first step, the City will work with the School Board of Alachua County
(SBAC) to ensure that all schools are operating within their enrollment capacity and offering
quality learning environments, and to monitor students’ performance and achievemen.t At the
same time, quality education requires many additional factors beyond the schools themselves:
students should have safe transportation options to get to and from school and after school
programs; families need access to housing near quality schools; and students need after-school
programs that help students complete their homework and participate in extra-curricular
activities. The City will advance these closely related strategies to ensure access to quality
education for all.
199
2025-910A
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Classroom size and school enrollment data by school (Florida Inventory of School
Houses (FISH) or Alachua County Public Schools 2021 Annual Report)
• School performance
o School performance by neighborhood/district
o High school graduation rates by neighborhood/district
• Impact on surrounding community
o Number of community-related programs held on school sites, and number of
attendees at these programs
o Number of ACPS registered with GFR and/or ACFR as emergency shelters
o Number of ACPS registered with City Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs for
summer programs; community education; recreation events (e.g., intramural
sports).
• Commute times to school by commute mode
• Number of affordable housing units per school district/within walking or biking distance
of education facilities
Objective 1.1 – Create quality learning environments in all schools in
coordination with the School Board of Alachua County (SBAC)
Policy 1.1.1 Update school concurrency requirements to more-effectively control school
capacity and classroom size, informed by stakeholder input. Given that the
concurrency requirements are a part of an Interlocal Agreement, the City will
coordinate with ACPS, the County, and other municipalities to adopt this change
in the Agreement.
Policy 1.1.2 Direct resources (both financial resources and school supplies and materials) to
schools that are currently underfunded
Policy 1.1.3 Coordinate with ACPS, Alachua County, and other municipalities on amending the
Interlocal Agreement for Public School Facility Planning (ILA) to allow the City to
review all new public education facilities and sites for consistency with the
Comprehensive Plan.
Policy 1.1.4 Create agreements to site community uses, such as workforce housing and
daycare centers, on SBAC sites.
Objective 1.2 – Ensure the City’s decisions, including those beyond land use
such as after school activities, transportation, and health, consider the impact
on children attending public schools.
Policy 1.2.1 Continue to include a School Board representative on City advisory boards and
committees to facilitate a more unified and informed approach to addressing
gaps in education. Example advisory boards and committees can include but are
200
2025-910A
not limited to those that cover planning and zoning, recreation activities,
transportation, housing, safety, and health.
Policy 1.2.2 Expand transportation options to school and afterschool activities. The City will
work to ensure that all students have a variety of transportation options to and
from school and afterschool activities, including walking, biking, and public
transit. Implementation will be based on the Safe Routes to School design
guidelines. The City will ensure all students have safe and convenient access to
schools through mechanisms such as the last-mile/first-mile service and fare-
free programs for low-income households.
Policy 1.2.3 Provide and support the development of affordable housing in neighborhoods
near high-performing schools to families with children. Priority actions for the
City include working through the Where We Live Chapter of the Comprehensive
Plan to site affordable housing in close proximity to high-performing schools
through grants and incentives.
Policy 1.2.4 Utilize school sites to contribute to the needs of families and the surrounding
neighborhood. The City will adopt land development regulations that expand
the permitted uses on school sites by doing the following:
a. Adopt land development regulations that expand the range of permitted uses
in school-related zoning districts.
b. Collaborate with ACPS to permit a mix of community-oriented uses after
school hours on sites managed by SBAC, including markets, playgrounds,
nighttime classes, and other non- intensive, community-gathering uses.
Policy 1.2.5 Continue partnerships and programs offering after-school care for students. The
City will continue partnerships and programs that provide resources, at little or
no cost, to underfunded schools and low-income neighbors. Subsidized
educational resources, such as after-school care that assists students with meals
and in completing school assignments, will help to create more equitable
academic outcomes.
201
2025-910A
Goal 2: All Gainesville residents will have access to resources
that enable continued learning and training.
Education extends beyond the physical classroom. With input from neighbors, the City will
collaborate with stakeholders on implementing trade and vocational training programs to
create employment opportunities for residents who are unemployed or underemployed,
students who do not wish to attend a four-year degree program, and residents facing challenges
resulting from incarceration, homelessness, and poverty. Additionally, realizing the importance
of technology to teaching and learning, the City will collaborate with stakeholders on providing
access to high-speed broadband connectivity for all.
Indicators (How we measure progress):
• Employment data
• Training school completion rates
• Household broadband internet access
• Post-graduation employment
202
2025-910A
Objective 2.1 – Deliver training and resources for continued learning
opportunities outside of the traditional classroom.
Policy 2.1.2 Provide unemployed and underemployed residents with training for an industry-
recognized trade that is aligned with an apprenticeship. The City will foster
partnerships with nonprofits and institutions that provide specialized, hands-on-
training and work-based learning experiences with apprenticeships that enhance
the educational outcomes of underserved stakeholders by making quality
educational resources accessible.
Policy 2.1.3 Provide high school students with hands-on training and the opportunity to earn
industry certifications through grants. The City will partner with schools,
employers, and nonprofits to establish programs that are designed to support
the educational needs of students wishing to pursue a path to high-paying career
opportunities without the need for a four-year degree. By establishing programs
that are designed to support non-traditional career paths, the City will help to
ensure that all students regardless of educational upbringing will have equitable
access to positive long-term educational outcomes.
Policy 2.1.4 Provide job training for residents returning from incarceration through
partnerships with public and private organizations. A successful workforce
reentry program will help returning residents compete for jobs, attain stable
housing, support their families, and contribute to the community.
Policy 2.1.5 Provide free job skills training services for neighbors experiencing homelessness
or poverty through partnerships with public and private organizations. By
partnering to provide equitable access to free job skill training services as well as
support for accessing stable housing, the City will assist residents who cannot
otherwise afford the educational resources needed to enter or re-enter the
workforce.
Policy 2.1.6 Establish a summer internship program through the City to engage high school
students, college students, and Gainesville youth in careers in local government.
The City will centralize summer and year-round internship opportunities across
various City departments to provide job training and hands-on experience in their
desired field. Internships with the City are valuable work experience but can also
inspire a new generation of youth in government. Through a centralized
internship program, the City can directly offer cross-cutting educational
experiences.
203
